Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we are going to be discussing bipolar disorder,
often called bipolar depression.
Bipolar depression is a condition
in which people undergo massive shifts in their energy,
their perception, and their mood.
However, it is very important to note
that the shifts in mood, energy, and perception
are all maladaptive.
They can often cause tremendous damage
to the person suffering from bipolar disorder
and tremendous damage to the people in their lives.
Today, we're going to parse the biology
that leads to the shifts in mood, energy, and perception,
and we are going to talk about
the various treatments that exist.
Some of those treatments have been around
for a very long time, and indeed, one of those treatments,
lithium, has an incredible backstory about its discovery,
and in understanding how lithium works
and some of the ways in which it does not work well,
it reveals a tremendous amount
about how the brain works normally in all individuals.
So that's a miraculous story
that I look forward to sharing with you.
As we go forward in this discussion about bipolar disorder,
I want everyone to keep in mind
that it is a very severe condition.
In fact, people suffering from bipolar disorder
are at 20 to 30 times greater risk of suicide.
So today is a serious discussion,
and it's certainly one in which people
who are suffering from manic bipolar disorder
or who know people that are suffering
from manic bipolar disorder can benefit from.
However, for those of you that might know people
or who themselves suffer from major depression,
we will also be talking about important treatment
developments for major depression.
Major depression is a very common thing for many people.
In fact, most people will suffer from depression
of some sort at some point in their life,
although not necessarily a major depressive episode,
and yet major depression is very common.
So you'll soon learn up to 20% of people
will suffer from major depression.
So today's discussion will encompass all of that,
and it will also encompass basic brain mechanisms
of neuroplasticity, the brain's ability to change
in response to experience both for good and for worse,
and you'll learn a lot about the basic biology
of how the brain regulates mood, energy, and perception.
I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast
is now partnered with Momentous Supplements.
We often talk about supplements on the Huberman Lab Podcast,
and while supplements aren't necessary for everybody,
many people derive tremendous benefit from them
for things like enhancing the quality and speed
with which you get into sleep,
or for enhancing focus, or for hormone support.
The reason we partnered with Momentous Supplements
is several fold.
First of all, their supplements
are of the absolute highest quality.
Second of all, they ship internationally,
which is important because many of our podcast listeners
reside outside the US.
Third, many of the supplements that Momentous makes,
and most all of the supplements
that we partnered with them directly on
are single ingredient formulations.
This is important for a number of reasons.
First of all, if you're going to create
a supplement protocol that's customized for your needs,
you want to be able to figure out
which supplement ingredients are most essential
and only use those,
and supplements that combine lots of ingredients
simply won't allow you to do that.
If you'd like to see the supplements
that we partnered with Momentous on,
you can go to livemomentous.com slash Huberman,
and there you'll see many of the supplements
that we've talked repeatedly about
on the Huberman Lab podcast episodes.
I should mention that the catalog of supplements
that are available at livemomentous.com slash Huberman
is constantly being expanded,
so you can check back there livemomentous.com slash Huberman
to see what's currently available,
and from time to time,
you'll notice new supplements being added to the inventory.
Before we dive into the discussion
about manic bipolar disorder,
I want to highlight some recent findings
in an area totally separate from mental health
that I think are really important for everyone to know about.
This is a paper published in the journal Cell,
which is a Cell Press journal, an excellent journal,
in fact, one of the three apex journals,
so for those of you that are curious,
papers published in the journal Nature, Science, and Cell
are considered the sort of Super Bowl, Stanley Cup,
and NBA championships of publishing,
and this paper entitled
An Interorgan Neural Circuit for Appetite Suppression
illustrates a very important principle
that I think everyone should know about,
and that's the principle of so-called parallel pathways.
Parallel pathways, as the name suggests, are pathways.
They could be neural pathways or hormonal pathways
or otherwise that operate independently of one another
to accomplish a common goal,
and what this paper really shows
is that there's a set of peptides in the body,
and the peptide that I'm referring to today
is called GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide one,
and some related peptides.
I've talked about these on the podcast before
for two reasons.
First of all, I'm a big proponent and consumer
of Yerba Mate, Yerba Mate is a tea
that can promote the release of glucagon-like peptide one,
and there are also new prescription drugs
that are now hitting the market
and for which there are really impressive clinical trials
for diabetes and obesity
that are essentially glucagon-like peptide one stimulators,
so they stimulate the release of that,
or they are in fact a synthetic version
of glucagon-like peptide one.
What is glucagon-like peptide one?
It is a peptide, which is a small little protein
that can dramatically suppress appetite,
so that's why these drugs are being explored
and are showing quite impressive results
for things like treatment of type 2 diabetes
and other forms of diabetes as well as obesity,
so they lead to weight loss.
Now, in terms of the Yerba Mate stimulation
of glucagon-like peptide one,
that's going to be a much lower amount of glucagon-like
peptide one that's released from drinking Yerba Mate
as opposed to, say, taking a drug that stimulates GLP-1
or taking a drug that is GLP-1.
Nonetheless, I should also point out
that Yerba Mate comes in a bunch of different forms.
There is some concern about certain smoky-flavored forms
of Yerba Mate being carcinogenic,
so that's why I avoid those forms of Yerba Mate,
but for me, Yerba Mate is one of the preferred sources
of caffeine for me.
I like the way it tastes.
It does provide that sort of caffeine kick
that I like to have early in the day
for focus and for work and for exercise,
and yet I actively avoid the smoked varieties
of Yerba Mate because of the potential carcinogenic effects
of the smoked varieties.
Glucagon-like peptide one, as I mentioned earlier,
can suppress appetite, but what this paper shows
is it does that by at least two mechanisms
through parallel pathways.
What this paper shows is that glucagon-like peptide one
acts on receptors in the body
in a portion of the nervous system
called the enteric nervous system, E-N-T-E-R-I-C,
enteric nervous system.
This is a component of your nervous system
that you don't really have control over.
It's autonomic or automatic.
GLP-1 binds to what are called
intestinal fugal enteric neurons.
You don't need to know the name,
but those neurons do two things.
First of all, they cause some gut distension,
so they actually make you feel full.
This is incredible, right?
A peptide, not actual physical food,
but a peptide that stimulates neurons
that cause changes in the so-called mechanoreceptors
of the gut of the enteric nervous system
and make people feel full.
So it can lead to actually mild,
or I suppose if levels of GLP-1 are very high,
to major gut distension, okay?
I think that the levels of GLP-1
that would come from drinking Yerba Mate
and hopefully from appropriate dosaging
of the synthetic forms of GLP-1
or drugs that stimulate GLP-1 would cause mild,
not major gut distension
because major gut distension would be uncomfortable.
So GLP-1 is acting at the level of gut
to increase gut distension
and by way of a pathway that goes from the gut
up to the hypothalamus, this little cluster of neurons
about the size of a marble
that sits above the roof of your mouth
is also suppressing appetite through brain mechanisms.
So this is really beautiful, right?
You have a peptide, a small little protein
that's released in the gut
and that release within the gut causes gut distension
which makes you feel full
and by way of neural stimulation of the hypothalamus
also activates neural pathways within the brain
that trigger satiety,
the feeling of having had enough food.
So to me, GLP-1 is both impressive and important, why?
Because this recent category of drugs
that's now hitting the market seems to adjust obesity
or can help people with weight loss
in order to help their health
and it's doing so by at least two mechanisms.
One is within the brain
and the other is within the gut and communication
through the so-called gut brain access
because again, these enteric neurons
are communicating to the brain, the hypothalamus
by way of this what's called
the sympathogastrospinal reticular hypothalamic pathway.
You absolutely do not need to know all of that.
That's a mouthful.
That's enough to make your mouth feel distended
but at the same time, things like yerba mate
and I'm sure there are other compounds out there as well
but certainly yerba mate can stimulate the release of GLP-1.
So for those of you that are looking
for some mild appetite suppression
and want to accomplish that while also ingesting caffeine,
yerba mate might be a good option for that
and just know that it's operating through two mechanisms
on the body through mild gut distension
to make you feel full and on the brain
to increase satiety or make you feel less hungry.
And then for everybody,
not just those that are interested in appetite suppression,
I think it's important to understand
that these parallel pathways are fundamental
to how we are organized.
Another good example of this would be
when we are excited by something, positive or negative,
so it could be stressful or we're positively aroused,
there is a parallel activation of epinephrine, adrenaline,
both from your adrenals and from an area in the brain
called the locus coeruleus.
So again and again, we see this in biology
and in neuroscience,
that your brain and your body are acting in concert.
They're acting together through mechanisms
that either are independent, so separately in the brain
and separately in the body,
but directed towards a common goal
or through communication between brain and body
and almost always,
that communication is going to be bi-directional,
body to brain and brain to body.
So I think these results are really interesting
and really important for sake of weight loss,
for sake of appetite suppression
and just generally for the way that they illustrate
this very important theme of the way that we are constructed
at a biological level, which is parallel pathways.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information about science
and science related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that many of the factors
that impact your immediate and long-term health
can only be assessed with a quality blood test.
And nowadays, with the advent of modern DNA tests,
you can also get insight into, for instance,
what your biological age is
and compare that to your chronological age.
And of course, your biological age is the one
that's important for your longevity
and your understanding of your current health needs.
One major problem with most blood tests
and DNA tests out there, however,
is that you get information back
about levels of metabolic factors,
levels of hormones and lipids and so forth,
but you don't know exactly what to do with that information.
InsideTracker solves that problem
through their personalized platform,
which can tell you, for instance, lifestyle factors
like fitness or nutrition or supplementation
that you can use to bring the numbers
into the ranges that are ideal for your health needs.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker,
you can visit insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans.
That's insidetracker.com slash Huberman to get 20% off.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Roca.
Roca makes eyeglasses and sunglasses
that are of the absolute highest quality.
The company was founded
by two all-American swimmers from Stanford,
and everything about Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses
were designed with performance in mind.
I've spent a lifetime working on the biology
of the visual system,
and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend
with a number of very important challenges
in order for you to see clearly.
The designers of Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses
understand this, and for that reason,
Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses allow you, for instance,
to move from a shady area to a bright area
or from a bright area to a shady area
and still see everything with crystal clarity.
Originally, their glasses and sunglasses
were designed for performance,
that is, for running and cycling,
and as a consequence, the eyeglasses and sunglasses
stay on your face even if you get sweaty,
and they're extremely lightweight.
In fact, most of the time,
I don't even realize that they're on my face.
I wear Roca eyeglasses for reading and for driving at night,
and I wear their sunglasses when I'm out during the day,
and it's really bright, and I need to use sunglasses
in order to be able to navigate in that bright sunlight.
If you'd like to try Roca glasses,
you can go to Roca.com, that's R-O-K-A.com,
and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off
your first order.
Again, that's Roca, R-O-K-A.com,
and enter the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Blinkist.
Blinkist is an app that has thousands of nonfiction books
condensed down to just 15 minutes each of key takeaways
that you can read or listen to.
I'm a big believer in reading physical books.
I actually own a lot of hardcover books and paperback books,
and I like holding them in my hand
and flipping through the pages.
I also like listening to audio books,
but the reality is I don't have a ton of time to read books,
and I don't have a lot of time
to listen to entire audio books.
There are also a lot of books that I've really enjoyed
in the past that I have read in their entirety,
but that I like to update myself on the information on
every once in a while.
Blinkist has terrific books available.
For instance, I'm a big fan of Tim Ferriss's
"'4-Hour Body," gleaned so much knowledge from that book,
also from Nassim Taleb's book,
"'The Black Swan," and the great Matt Walker's book,
"'Why We Sleep," which is a book
that I've read several times,
and I actually listened to the synopsis of on Blinkist
over and over because there's so many key takeaways.
With Blinkist, you get unlimited access to read
or listen to a massive library
of condensed nonfiction books,
essentially all of the books
that you ever wanted to listen to,
and now you have time because they're condensed
down to just 15 minutes each.
Right now, Blinkist has a special offer
just for Huberman Lab Podcast listeners.
If you go to blinkist.com slash Huberman,
you can get a free seven-day trial
and you can get 20% off a Blinkist premium membership.
That's Blinkist, spelled B-L-I-N-K-I-S-T,
blinkist.com slash Huberman to get 25% off
and a seven-day free trial.
Let's talk about bipolar disorder.
And today I'm going to refer to bipolar disorder
interchangeably with bipolar depression.
Although, as you will soon learn,
not everyone with bipolar disorder
necessarily goes through highs and lows.
There is a subset of people who suffer from bipolar disorder
who experienced the manic phases,
the highly elevated mood and energy,
and then dropped down to so-called baseline.
So they don't necessarily go down into a depressive state.
They often will return to a somewhat normal state.
In fact, we will talk about the percentage of time
that people with bipolar disorder
tend to be symptom-free, manic, or depressed
in the context of the different categories
of bipolar disorder.
But as we wade into this topic that is bipolar disorder,
I just want to give you a little bit
of the background statistics to anchor us
in just how serious and prevalent bipolar disorder is.
So bipolar disorder impacts about 1% of people.
That might seem like a small percentage,
but if you think about a room of 100 people,
that means that at least one of them
is very likely to have bipolar disorder.
And as I mentioned earlier in the introduction,
bipolar disorder is very serious.
It has a 20 to 30% greater incidence of suicide
than the general population,
which is, first of all,
extremely tragic and extremely concerning.
So anyone that thinks they might have bipolar disorder
or who knows someone with bipolar disorder
should be especially vigilant about this.
And we'll talk about some of the signs and risk factors,
age of onset, et cetera, as we move forward.
So 1% of people have bipolar disorder.
The typical age of onset is anywhere from 20 to 25 years old
although it can be much earlier.
And the earlier the onset of a bipolar episode,
which we will define in a few minutes,
the earlier the onset of that episode,
the higher likelihood that the bipolar disorder
is going to be a stable feature
of that person's psychology going forward.
And yet, I also want to point out
that there are some very good treatments
for bipolar disorder
that those people could still benefit from.
There are basically two kinds of bipolar disorder
referred to as bipolar I and bipolar II.
So let's just talk about bipolar I first.
Bipolar I is characterized
by a fairly extended period of mania.
What is mania?
Mania is a period of very elevated mood, energy,
distractibility, impulsivity, and some other symptomology
that we'll talk about going forward.
But this manic episode is extreme.
This is a condition in which the energy lift,
the mood lift, and the sort of impulsivity
and actions and words of the person
suffering from manic bipolar disorder
are very noticeable and very extreme.
Now, a key thing, however,
is that it's not always noticeable
to the person suffering from it
that they are in this mode.
Sometimes they recognize that, sometimes they don't,
but it's always highly recognizable to other people
that the person suffering from manic bipolar disorder
is not like other people.
So let's talk about bipolar I in a little bit more depth.
One of the key clinical criteria
or diagnostic criteria for bipolar I
is that a person suffer from these manic episodes
or display these manic episodes for seven days or more.
That turns out to be very key.
The stability of that manic episode for seven days or more
turns out to be very important.
And for those seven days,
the person is in an elevated mood, expansive thought
all day, every day for those seven days.
Now, there are a lot of reasons
why somebody could be in a manic mode.
It doesn't necessarily mean
that somebody has bipolar disorder.
In fact, someone could be in a manic mode
for seven days or more
and still not be diagnosed with bipolar disorder.
Why?
Well, there are other things
that can create manic episodes,
things like traumatic brain injury,
things like seizure,
things like various prescription drugs or illicit drugs,
things like amphetamine and cocaine.
That is not the same as bipolar disorder,
even though from a symptomology perspective,
they might look even identical.
So let's think about these symptoms
and the diagnostic criteria that a psychiatrist would use
in order to ask whether or not someone is manic
because they have manic bipolar disorder
or whether or not that person is manic
for some other reason,
such as traumatic brain injury, illicit drugs, et cetera.
So typically a person will be brought into a clinic
or a person would bring themselves to a clinic
or meet with a psychiatrist.
It seems more likely that they would be directed
toward a psychiatrist
because oftentimes people who are in a manic episode
just simply won't have the perspective
or the foresight to bring themselves into the clinic.
And the psychiatrist is going to start to evaluate
for a couple of different things.
But first of all, what they're going to try and figure out
is whether or not the person has at least three
of the following symptoms.
The first symptom is distractibility.
Is the person distractible?
Are they going from one thing to the next?
People who are in a manic episode
will be talking about a pen
and then they'll be talking about, you know,
something they saw the other day
and then something they want to purchase
and then a place they're going to travel to, et cetera.
But they are also very prone to any stimulus
within the room, meaning, you know, a bell could go off
or there could be a sound out in the hallway
and they'll orient to that.
And then they'll orient to the clinician
and then they'll orient to something in their pocket.
So they're all over the place.
You could think of this a little bit like ADHD
or attention deficit disorder, but it's very extreme.
So highly distractible, highly impulsive.
Impulsivity relates to actions.
So the person might be fidgeting with something
and then they might try and leave the room
or the person might, if they were out in the real world,
somebody might notice that the person is going
and purchasing, you know, multiples of something
that would be unusual for someone to purchase.
So for instance, I happen to know someone
whose ex-spouse had bipolar disorder
and their ex-spouse went out
and bought 10 plus air fryers, right?
I mean, I think unless you're a restaurant
that's using a lot of air fryers,
the idea that you would need more than one
or two air fryers might just seem
a little bit out of the norm.
And so that impulsivity can be purchasing.
It can be other things as well.
It could be booking, you know, 12 international trips
in one afternoon or going and buying three cars, et cetera.
So impulsivity.
The other is grandiosity.
People who have manic bipolar disorder
who are in a manic episode will often display words of
or actions of grandiosity.
And keep in mind, these are not lies
in the sense that the person isn't lying
in order to try and pull one over on anybody.
These are actual beliefs that the person comes to have
about their grandiose position in the world
or grandiose opportunities or potential in the world.
Typical forms of grandiosity in manic episodes would be
that the person suddenly decides
that they are going to win a Pulitzer Prize.
They are the person selected to win a Pulitzer Prize.
They're going to write a novel that afternoon
and they're going to win a Pulitzer Prize that year,
which is more or less a delusion of grandeur, right?
The idea that someone could do that in one afternoon,
I suppose it is possible in the realm of all possibilities,
but it's extremely unlikely.
Other forms of grandiosity that often present themselves
in people suffering from a manic episode
will be that they're going to run for president
or that they are the person that they believe is selected
by the citizens of a given country
or by the universe to be the president of that country
or to be president of the universe, right?
It sounds ridiculous, but those sorts of delusions
of grandiosity are one condition that often presents itself
or one set of symptoms that presents itself.
Flight of ideas are also typical of manic episodes.
So this is a little bit like distractibility,
but this would be people talking extensively about one thing
and then switching and talking extensively
about something else.
It would be as if I was doing this podcast,
talking about manic bipolar disorder,
and then suddenly switching to OCD
and then to deliberate cold exposure
and then to the role of sugar
and its impact on the brain, et cetera.
So essentially a random selection
of the different topics that exist in science,
all of which I happen to be very interested in
and curious about, but just as we have episodes
of the podcast that are about one or two topics
and we focus on those in a fairly narrow trench
of discussion, somebody who has a flight of ideas
would be jumping between categories and topics
in a kind of pseudo random way.
So they might take off down a path of one thing
and then switch to another without any transition
or with transitions that don't have
any logical structure to them.
The other aspect of manic bipolar disorder
that often presents itself in the manic episodes
are agitation, people feeling extremely physically agitated,
so a lot of shaking and moving about.
This can venture into the realm of paranoia,
but a lot of agitation, a difficulty sitting down
and being still, a difficulty in just looking,
feeling and acting calm.
And then another condition is no sleep.
And when I say no sleep, I mean no sleep
or very minimal sleep.
As incredible as it sounds, people who are in a manic episode
can often go seven days or more with zero sleep.
And a key feature of this zero sleep
is that they're not troubled by it.
They're not thinking, oh, I'm suffering from insomnia
and I really, really want to sleep.
Sometimes that's the case, but more often than not,
they are simply not sleeping.
They're staying up 24 hours, then another 24 hours,
it just continues for an entire week.
Again, inconceivable to those of us
that don't suffer from manic episodes,
can only imagine how pulled apart most of us would feel
under those conditions and yet they are just going
and going and going with no sleep up all hours,
shopping, talking, running,
doing all sorts of different things
in the categories of other symptoms
that we talked about before.
And it doesn't bother them that they're not sleeping.
And then the last sort of category of symptoms
that the psychiatrist is evaluating for
and seeing if they present is rapid pressured speech.
The rapid pressured speech is something
that when you hear it, you recognize it.
This is somebody that almost seems to be hitting you
a speech like machine gun fire.
It's coming at you, coming at you, coming at you,
and there's really no room for conversation.
They're not offering any opportunity for a back and forth,
or if there is a back and forth,
they might ask you how you feel about something
and then you started, well, then they're going to hit you
with another barrage or a paragraph of information
or of just speech that's pseudo random.
So we've got distractibility, impulsivity, grandiosity,
flight of ideas, agitation, no sleep,
and rapid pressured speech.
For someone to be diagnosed as in a manic episode,
they do not have to be engaging in
or displaying all of those symptoms.
They do, however, need to present
at least three of those symptoms.
And then in order to meet the condition of bipolar I,
they have to be presenting those three symptoms
for at least seven days.
It could be longer, but at least seven days.
Now, this seems pretty straightforward, right?
At one level, the way that I describe this
and the way that it exists in the clinical literature,
you could think, well, this should be pretty easy
to diagnose, and yet there's a complication there
or a challenge there because the psychiatrist, again,
has to determine that these manic episodes
are not due to something other than bipolar disorder.
For instance, again, it could be TBI, traumatic brain injury,
it could be seizures or meds or other sorts of drugs.
Corticosteroids, which are often prescribed
for a number of immune conditions or for wound healing,
can also cause manic episodes.
So they have to determine that everything that's happening
meets the criteria I described before,
three out of seven of these symptom categories
for seven days or more,
and that it can't be better explained
by something else going on in that person's life
or immediate medical history.
That's very important.
Now, the other challenge,
and this is something that's going to come up
again and again today,
not just in the description of the biology
of bipolar disorder, but also in the description
of different treatments and treatment approaches,
is that typically when somebody is sitting
in front of a psychiatrist,
in particular for the first time,
those two people are interacting,
the psychiatrist is just getting one snapshot
of the person at that moment, right?
So the person could be on day one of a manic episode,
the person might be on day six of a manic episode,
the person could be transitioning out of a manic episode,
or the person could be suffering
from a combination of manic episode
where because of the impulsivity of bipolar disorder,
they went out and used illicit drugs,
they also used cocaine.
So the psychiatrist has a serious challenge.
The psychiatrist has to determine
based on a conversation, right?
This isn't a blood test,
this isn't a measurement that you can take on a scale
or with a biomarker,
they have to use language,
a conversation with somebody who by all accounts
is pretty impaired at conversation
to determine whether or not
they're suffering from a manic episode
that is the consequence of bipolar disorder.
You can imagine this in the real world as somebody says,
well, how long has it been since you slept?
And the person starts to answer,
oh, well, the other day I went down to the basement,
I was going to get something out of the refrigerator
and I thought I might take a nap
and then all of a sudden
they're talking about something completely different.
So they might not even have an answer.
So the psychiatrist has to be a really good detective,
a benevolent detective, but a detective nonetheless
in determining whether or not
these symptoms have existed for seven days or more
and whether or not they meet at least three,
it could be more, but at least three of the criteria
of symptom categories I talked about before.
Now, assuming that they do,
assuming that the patient meets those criteria,
they are likely to be diagnosed with bipolar I.
Now bipolar I disorder
means they're having these extended manic episodes,
seven days or more,
but it does not necessarily mean that they are dropping
into a depressive episode as well.
This is a common misconception about bipolar disorder
because as it's often called,
bipolar disorder is referred to as bipolar depression
and yet many people with bipolar disorder
don't necessarily experience the deep depressive episodes.
Many of them do, but many of them do not.
So somebody can truly be diagnosed accurately
with bipolar I,
even though they're only experiencing manic episodes
and then dropping down to baseline.
Manic episode, then dropping down to baseline.
That's very important to understand.
Now, the second category of bipolar disorder is bipolar II.
So BP2 or bipolar disorder II
is somewhat different than bipolar disorder I.
First of all, it's characterized most often
by the presence of both manic episodes,
mania and depressive episodes,
or what's referred to as hypomania.
Now, anytime in biology or in medicine you hear hypo,
it's the opposite of hyper, okay?
So we've got normal, hyper and hypo.
Hypomania is a somewhat suppressed level of mania.
So this is not going to be as extreme as the mania
that we typically think of.
And yet the hypo can be due to the duration,
not the intensity of mania.
That's right.
Hypomania can mean a lessened intensity of mania,
but it can also be used
to refer to a shorter duration of mania.
In fact, that's one of the key criteria for bipolar II.
Bipolar II is often diagnosed
on the basis of the presence of manic episodes
that are lasting four days or even less.
So someone with BP2 might have four days
of this increased energy, goal-directed activity.
They're irritable, they're euphoric,
they're not sleeping, et cetera,
but it's only lasting for about four days.
Or they could be having longer extended periods of mania,
but they are hypomanic episodes.
They're not quite as intense.
So the pressured speech isn't quite as pressured.
The impulsivity isn't quite as severe, et cetera, et cetera.
The other aspect of bipolar II
is one that I had mentioned briefly a moment ago,
which is that it's often associated
with the drops into the depressive episodes.
So people are going from manic episodes
for four days or less,
then they're dropping into a depression,
going back to normal, manic again.
I do want to point out, however,
that people who have bipolar I
can indeed go from manic episodes
to severe what we call major depression.
So they can oscillate like a sine wave,
really high highs, really low lows.
And very important to understand
in terms of understanding both bipolar I and bipolar II
is that it's not always a sine wave.
This is really important.
And it's something that frankly I did not know
until I started researching this episode
and talking to some psychiatrists.
I should mention I've talked
to several board-certified psychiatrists
in preparation for this episode.
I'll give some references to them.
And in fact, some of them are going to be coming
on the podcast as guests in the future
for a more in-depth discussion about bipolar
and other psychiatric disorders.
But all of the psychiatrists I spoke to
confirmed what the other was saying,
which was that the way that bipolar disorder can present
can vary tremendously between individuals.
One person might go from very high highs
that last seven days or more to very low lows,
bouts of depression, major depression
that could last two weeks or more.
Other people are rapid cycling by way of three days manic,
three days normal, three days manic,
and then dropping into three days depression.
So you want to erase that picture in your mind
that manic bipolar disorder is this sine wave,
this cycling up and down between mania and depression.
It can take a lot of different forms.
And again, this is a serious challenge
for the psychiatrist to diagnose people
because of that fact
that they're only getting a snapshot of the person
unless they've known them for some time
and are working with them for some time.
But this is also especially important for those of you
that either have bipolar depression
or suspect that you might,
or that know someone with bipolar depression
or suspect somebody might have bipolar depression,
AKA bipolar disorder.
Because if you're noticing that somebody
is very manic and then normal,
well, that's a very different picture
than somebody who's going from very manic
to very deep bouts of depression.
The very manic to deep bouts of depression
is easier to recognize
because of the extremes of those highs and lows.
Now, this might seem somewhat obvious to all of you
as I describe it.
And yet it's very important as a, frankly,
a citizen of the planet who knows other human beings
to keep an eye out for these manic episodes
because again, whether or not it's four days or less
or whether or not it's seven days or more,
these manic episodes really are the defining criteria
of bipolar disorder, AKA bipolar depression.
There are a couple other key features
about bipolar I and bipolar II
that can allow us to get better insight
into whether or not somebody has bipolar I or bipolar II.
And that's the percentage of time
that people with bipolar I versus bipolar II
spend in a manic state, a depressed state,
or a symptom-free state.
And this is also important to discuss
because it turns out that people with genuine,
diagnosed bipolar I or bipolar II are often symptom-free,
which again can make it difficult
for us as people that know them
or for people that are treating people
with bipolar disorder to identify
whether or not somebody is in a manic episode
or a depressive episode,
or whether or not they are headed
into a manic or depressive episode.
So the numbers on this have been studied.
It's from a paper, actually two papers,
first author Judd, J-U-D-D et al,
published some years ago, 20 years ago,
but the data hold up really nicely over time.
These were both published
in Journal of American Medical Association Psychiatry.
So JAMA Psychiatry is a superb journal.
And basically people who have bipolar I on average
spend about 50%, it's actually 53%
was the number that was eventually converged upon,
but about 50% of their time symptom-free.
That's interesting, right?
Somebody who has genuine bipolar I disorder
can spend as much as half of their life symptom-free,
sleeping normally, speaking normally, et cetera,
about 32% of the time depressed.
And when we say depressed, we mean major depression.
So severe challenges with waking up
at two or three in the morning
and having trouble falling back asleep,
that's one of the defining characteristics of depression
or sleeping far too much,
having a hard time getting out of bed in the morning,
suppressed appetite, suppressed libido,
suppressed motivation, all the general symptoms
of major depression,
which we'll talk about a little bit more later
and in an upcoming episode
about major depression in particular.
And then about 15% of their time
in this kind of manic state or mixed manic state
where they are showing long,
again, seven days or more bouts of sleeplessness,
irritability, pressured speech, grandiosity, et cetera.
Contrast that with people who have bipolar II disorder
who are spending about half of their time
in a depressed state.
So that's interesting.
People with bipolar II disorder,
while not always displaying depressed states
or oscillations between mania or hypomania
and depressed states,
they tend to be in a depressed state more often.
And again, this is major depression.
This isn't just a little bit of a low.
This is a serious depression of their nervous system,
their mood, and as we say, their affect,
their outlook on life.
And that's one of the key distinguishing features
of major depression is that people's outlook on life
becomes very diminished in the sense
that they don't see a future.
You ask them about, you know, how's work going?
How are relationships?
And it's not just that they feel that that's going poorly.
They really feel as if there's no opportunity
for those things to improve.
Those people with bipolar II tend to be symptom-free
about 45% of the time.
Again, these are averages.
So about 45% of the time.
That's a considerable amount of the time.
And they tend to be in these hypomanic states
only about four or 5% of the time.
Again, the criteria for BP2, bipolar II,
is these four days or less of mania or hypomania.
But only 4% of the time or 5% of the time
is a small enough sliver of the pie
that is these people's existence
that you can imagine why it would be easy
for them or other people to overlook the fact
that they have bipolar disorder and not major depression.
Think about it.
This is a person who, or I should say a collection of people
who are spending about half of their time depressed,
close to half, 45% of their time symptom-free,
and then about 5% of their time in a hypomanic state.
So either shortened bouts of high intensity mania
or hypomania that is of reduced intensity.
One of the reasons that I mentioned these percentages
of time spent in a symptom-free depressed manic
or hypomanic state is because one of my major goals
for today's episode is that it will increase awareness
of whether or not you or somebody you know,
could be a coworker, could be a family member, et cetera,
might be suffering from bipolar I or bipolar II.
I think it's fair to say that if somebody is suffering
from bipolar I, that is likely to be revealed
or to reveal itself before too long
because of the fact that people have these extended periods
of mania and mania is such an extreme state,
not just for the person who's experiencing it,
but the way that it presents is just so extreme
and out of the ordinary.
But bipolar II, you can imagine,
could really duck under the radar of our awareness.
And you could imagine that we might just think
somebody is low or depressed,
especially if that person tends to self-medicate
with alcohol or other substances.
We might think, oh, well, they're drinking more than often,
more than usual, excuse me,
or they're spending more time alone and isolating.
But then when they're in their hypomanic state,
that might actually present as normal to us
because they were in such a depressed state before.
So it's very important that we dial up our awareness,
that we can tune our antennae to the possibility
that people out there who might appear depressed
or that we haven't heard from in a while
might actually be suffering from bipolar II disorder.
Before we move into a in-depth discussion
about the different kinds of treatments
for bipolar disorder,
I'd like to touch on just a few additional aspects
of what bipolar disorder can do
in terms of its negative consequences
and also talk about some of the inherited risk,
that is the genetic factors and the environmental factors
that can contribute to bipolar disorder.
In terms of the burden,
the very real emotional and occupational
and educational burden
that can occur for somebody with bipolar disorder,
that's actually been studied.
There's a measure of this, it's called global burden,
which is defined as the years lost
in engaging in normal life due to some disability.
So that disability could be cancer,
that disability in this case is bipolar disorder.
And basically the way this sort of study is done
is that through questionnaires,
I should say quite in-depth questionnaires,
there's a probing for whether or not somebody
has lost two consecutive weeks or more
of interest in normal activities.
Now, for people who have depression,
that's a kind of straightforward thing to address, right?
You ask somebody, when was the last time you ate?
Or when was the last time that you went a few days
without food or lost interest in relationships
or work or sex or things of that sort?
And they answer and you can figure out
the amount of time that you've essentially been withdrawn
from normal levels of activity for them.
With bipolar disorder, what it turns out
is that the global burden of having bipolar I
and even bipolar II is massive.
In fact, having bipolar disorder sits
as one of the highest risk factors
for being in the top 10 of all categories of disabilities
leading to global burden.
Put in plain English, what that means is having bipolar I
or bipolar II disorder is extremely debilitating.
It really slows down one's life trajectory
unless it's treated properly.
Now, the other aspect of bipolar disorder
is its heritability.
And this gets into a little bit of some tricky science
related to heritability versus the genetic contribution
of a given disease.
So that might sound like the same thing.
You think, okay, genes relate to heritability,
heritability relates to genes,
but of course everything about the way
that our nervous system works and functions
and expresses itself, healthy or otherwise,
is an interaction between our genes and our environment.
And so typically the way these studies are done
is you address what is the risk of somebody
having a given condition in the general population?
We talked about that before.
Bipolar disorder is a 1% of the world's population.
Compare that to people who have only major depression.
So this would be repeated bouts of two weeks or more
of serious depression, not just low mood
or something due to a life loss, but major depression,
which is 10 to 17% of people have major depression.
Okay, they suffer from major depressive disorder
compared to bipolar disorder, which again is 1%.
Now you can address how much of the 1% of bipolar disorder
that exists is due to genes versus environment
in a somewhat exact way.
This is never an exact science.
And the way that this is typically done
is to look at concordance, that is the likelihood
that two identical twins will both have a given condition
as opposed to two fraternal twins,
which have more different genes
than identical twins, of course.
And then two siblings who have similar genes, of course,
but less similar than identical or fraternal twins
and so on and so forth.
So what you basically do is you evaluate the probability
that two people in the general population
who are completely unrelated will have the same condition
versus two people in the general population
who are very related identical twins.
And what you find is that in identical twins,
if one identical twin has true major depression
or major depressive disorder,
there's a 20 to 45% chance that their identical twin
will also have major depressive disorder.
Now that tells you right there that it can't all be genes.
That is not a gene for major depression per se,
or if it is a gene or a collection of genes,
that those genes are also subject to environmental
influences, either prenatal within the womb
or after children are born.
Now, the large range there of 20 to 45%
could be due to any number of things.
It could be experimental,
meaning the techniques that were used in experiments.
It could be due to regional differences, right?
One part of the world versus another.
There are a lot of different factors.
Right now, we probably shouldn't delve into all that.
At some point, we'll probably do an episode
all about the genetics of nervous system heritability
and heritability of features and mental health, et cetera.
But we can compare major depression and the heritability
or the genetic concordance between identical twins
in major depression and bipolar disorder and ask,
if one twin of an identical twin pair
has bipolar depression,
what is the likelihood that the other twin will have it?
And it turns out that number is much higher.
It's 40 to 70% likelihood or probability
that if one twin has bipolar disorder,
that their identical twin will also have bipolar disorder.
So again, the total incidence of bipolar disorder
in the general population is much lower
than it is for major depression.
It's 1% for bipolar versus 10 to 17% for major depression.
But the genetic component is much higher,
40 to 70% for bipolar disorder versus 20 to 45%
for major depression.
I know I'm throwing a lot of numbers out there,
but basically what this means is that researchers
have been able to take those numbers
and filter them through a number of different risk factors
that are related to early development,
ask questions like if two twins were raised separately
or together in one part of the world versus another,
or had a two-parent household versus one-parent household,
evaluate a lot of different variables.
What they were able to discover,
and this has been shown again and again,
is that the genetic contribution to bipolar disorder
is very, very high.
That is the heritability of bipolar disorder is 85%.
Okay, so again, I want to be really clear what this means.
The total occurrence in the general population, fairly low.
Still serious, 1%, but fairly low
compared to other things like major depression.
However, if someone has bipolar disorder,
it's very likely that they inherited some gene
or sets of genes or more accurately a susceptibility
within their genes to environmental influences
that can trigger bipolar disorder.
There are a lot of different ways to discuss
and to conceptualize heritability.
So I want to be very careful
with the way that I'm wording this.
What this means is that people with bipolar disorder
very likely have a gene or more typically
it's going to be a set of genes that creates a susceptibility
for bipolar disorder to present itself.
Now, what environmental factors trigger
or increase that susceptibility is not entirely clear.
This always seems to center back onto the same sets of things
like early life stress, trauma, et cetera.
Certainly those are going to exacerbate the likelihood
that someone who has a genetic propensity
for bipolar disorder will express that bipolar disorder
in its full array of symptomology,
but 85% while very, very high is not 100%.
Again, 85%, while a very high number for heritability
is not 100%.
What that means is that there is no single gene
or identified gene cluster for bipolar disorder.
The reason I keep drilling into this over and over
is that I think we can confidently say
that if someone has bipolar disorder,
that there was something in their genetic lineage
that led to that, or that very likely led to that.
And yet it's not like eye color
or some other physical feature
which we can actually do the direct,
so it's called Mendelian genetics
and figure out whether or not somebody directly inherited
that gene from one parent or the other parent.
So the takeaway here is that
if you have certainly an identical twin
or a fraternal twin or a sibling or a parent
or even a cousin or an uncle that has bipolar disorder
in particular bipolar one,
well then you need to be on the lookout
for bipolar disorder perhaps in yourself
and for the family members of that person.
My goal within this episode up until now
has been to provide a clear and detailed picture
of bipolar disorder and its various forms.
Before we start to talk about treatments
for bipolar disorder
and some of the neural circuit basis for bipolar disorder,
I want to make sure that I distinguish bipolar disorder
from borderline personality disorder.
We will do an entire episode
or maybe even several episodes
about borderline personality disorder.
Borderline personality disorder can indeed present itself
in ways that resemble bipolar disorder and vice versa,
but there are some key distinctions that need to be made
because it turns out that bipolar disorder
and borderline personality disorder are quite distinct
in terms of their defining criteria.
The key distinction between somebody
with borderline personality disorder and bipolar disorder
is that in borderline personality disorder,
there can be episodes that can resemble mania or hypomania.
So periods of flights of ideas
or where people are spending money excessively
or sexually promiscuous in ways that seem manic
or could even be a little bit manic or a lot manic.
And yet more often than not,
there is an environmental trigger for those manic episodes.
That is distinctly different from bipolar disorder
where the person will have manic episodes
without any need for a trigger.
There doesn't need to be a call from someone saying,
hey, let's go on a vacation together
or there's something coming up this Friday
that's really exciting
or let's enter a relationship together
of one form or another.
The person with bipolar disorder will have episodes of mania
or episodes of major depression
without any need for an external stimulus
or environmental trigger.
But the person with borderline personality disorder
almost always, again,
there's never an always in biology and psychiatry,
but almost always is going to exhibit flights of mania
or depressive episodes or other types of mood shifts
that are dramatic and maladaptive in response to things
that are coming in through the external environment
or relationships of some kind.
In fact, one of the defining characteristics
of borderline personality disorder
is this thing that's referred to as splitting.
A good example of splitting
in the person with borderline personality disorder
is that they will feel that they absolutely adore you
and want to spend all their time with you
and just think the world of you, you can do no wrong.
And in fact, they genuinely can feel that way
and can genuinely think that way about you.
And then for whatever reason,
it could be a perception of something that you did
or something that you said
or suspicion that you're thinking something about them,
they can suddenly shift or split their emotions
and what's called move you from a good object
or a can do no wrong object to a bad object.
They'll suddenly decide that you are cheating on them
or that you are being mean to them
or that you're insulting them
or that something that you're doing
is in violation to their self-worth,
their wellbeing, et cetera.
And that can send them down a pathway
of being very angry, very depressed, et cetera.
As I described the contour of a person
with borderline personality disorder
as somebody who splits very suddenly
in response to some environmental trigger,
real or perceived, there's the risk, of course,
that it makes the person with borderline personality disorder
sound like a bad person, that they're very volatile.
And while they can be volatile,
I want to be very careful to point out
that the person with borderline personality disorder
is also suffering in this context.
So while those sorts of relationships
with people with borderline personality disorder,
whether or not they're romantic relationships
or familial or coworkers, et cetera,
can be very challenged, can be very high friction
because of the good object, bad object shifts, et cetera,
it's bi-directional, meaning the person
with borderline personality disorder, as you can imagine,
is also going through a lot of suffering.
At one moment, they feel as if someone is wonderful
and can do no wrong to them
and they want to be so strongly affiliated with them.
And then in the next moment,
they feel as if that person is attacking them
through their actions or even through their non-actions.
So again, we will return
to borderline personality disorder in a separate episode.
It's a serious disorder, both for the person that has it
and for people around them.
Fortunately, there are some emerging treatments
that are showing promise,
and it's a fairly common disorder,
but it's important that we distinguish
borderline personality disorder from bipolar disorder,
mostly on the basis of this need for a trigger.
Again, in bipolar disorder,
there is no need for a trigger to create a manic episode
or a major depressive episode.
They just happen, or they can just happen.
Whereas in borderline personality disorder,
almost always there's an external trigger
or a perception that something happened in the environment
or that somebody is behaving a certain way
that dramatically shifts the person
with borderline personality disorder
from one mode to the next.
As we move into our discussion about the treatments for
and neural circuits underlying bipolar disorder,
I want to just nail down one more key point.
This is a very brief point,
but it's perhaps the most important point,
which is the highs and lows,
or we should say the highs,
these manic episodes and sometimes lows,
because again, not everybody with bipolar disorder one or two
suffers from depressive episodes.
Sometimes yes, sometimes no.
In particular in bipolar II, yes,
but people with bipolar I can have extreme manic episodes
and then just return to normal, as you recall.
Well, those extreme lows and or extreme highs
of people with bipolar disorder
impact their lives in very negative ways.
This is essential.
And it's something that we're going to return to
a little bit later when we talk about the relationship
between bipolar disorder and creativity,
because it turns out that there's
a quite strong association there,
one that would almost lead you to believe
that being bipolar can be beneficial in certain contexts.
And yet on whole, having bipolar disorder
is extremely detrimental
and challenging to the person suffering from it.
And it's something that we want to keep in mind
as we think about treatments and the underlying biology.
Now I'd like to talk about some of the treatments
for bipolar disorder.
And in the discussion of those treatments,
there's an absolutely incredible history
of the discovery of one particular treatment
that still shows great success in many patients,
although some people can't take it
for reasons that we'll talk about.
And in the description of the discovery of this treatment
for bipolar disorder,
it also reveals to us that sometimes
treatments come to the profession of medicine
and through science in ways that precede
the discovery of the underlying biology.
That's right.
Every once in a while,
someone will discover a treatment for a disease
without any understanding
about the underlying biological basis of that disease.
And in fact, that is the case for bipolar disorder.
And the treatment that we're referring to is lithium.
Lithium, as some of you know,
is on the periodic table of elements.
It is indeed a naturally occurring substance.
It actually arrived on earth by way of stardust.
Yes, we are talking about stardust on this podcast.
But if you'd like to learn more
about the origins of lithium
and how lithium arrived here on earth
for its discovery and applications in psychiatry,
there's a beautiful talk that exists on YouTube.
And we'll provide a link to this in the show note captions
that describes the history of lithium
in terms of its interplanetary travels
and arrival on earth.
This is a talk delivered by a physicist
who's expert in quantum mechanics
and is expert in lithium.
And it's a just wonderful talk that I can refer you to.
Less on the biology in that talk,
but certainly a lot about lithium as an element.
So for those of you nerds like me
that love to know how things came to be here on the planet
in one form or another,
I'll encourage you to take a brief listen to that talk.
We are going to discuss lithium
in the context of its applications
for treatment of bipolar disorder.
And the discovery of lithium
as a treatment for bipolar disorder
is truly a miraculous story
that I think everyone should know.
The key player in this story is a physician
by the last name Cade.
He was an Australian physician.
And Cade has a very interesting story in his own right.
Cade was an Australian psychiatrist
or Australian psychiatrist who also was a soldier.
And during World War II,
after the fall of Singapore to Japan,
he became a prisoner of war
and he was a prisoner of war from 1942 until 1945.
So he had some time for observation.
And during his imprisonment,
he observed some of his fellow inmates
as going through pretty wild vacillations
in mood and energy,
essentially going from manic episodes to depressed episodes
or from manic to normal episodes.
And for one reason or another,
we don't know why,
because I couldn't find any report
as to why he hypothesized this,
but he hypothesized that there was some buildup
of some chemical in these people's brains
that then they would urinate out
and that urinating out of whatever chemical was in there
would allow them to be more relaxed and not manic.
In other words,
Cade hypothesized that there's a buildup of a chemical
in certain people's brains that makes them manic
and they urinate that chemical out.
So eventually he got out of this prison,
as we mentioned, in 1945,
and he started doing experiments
in addition to seeing patients in his clinic.
And what he did is he started to take urine
from people who exhibited mania
and urine from people who were not manic.
And he took that urine
and he would inject it into guinea pigs
as an experimental model.
And his general observation
was that there was something in the urine
that was indeed making the guinea pigs more manic
if they were injected with urine from a manic patient.
The exact measures that he was taking in these guinea pigs
wasn't exactly clear.
This is at a time or an era in science
when you could just sort of report things
a little bit more subjectively.
Although there were still numbers and statistics,
it was a little bit more of like case studies
and descriptions,
but it turns out that even though
that all seems a little bit loose,
it led to some incredible and still important discoveries
for psychiatric health.
So what he figured out
was that the urine from manic patients
seemed to be more toxic for these guinea pigs.
And he also knew that there are two toxic substances
in urine, urea and uric acid.
So he was able to separate the urea and uric acid
from people with mania and patients that did not have mania.
And he figured out that the urea was the same
in both these mentally ill manic patients
and the non-manic patients.
So it did not seem that urea was the compound
that was creating these manic episodes
or related to manic episodes or held the toxicity.
So instead he focused on the uric acid.
Now, in order to put the uric acid into solution
so that he could inject it into these guinea pigs,
he had to try a number of different compounds
in order to dilute it.
It just so happens that,
and you chemists will be familiar with this,
but there's certain things
that just don't go into solution easily.
You put the powder in a vial,
you add some water or a saline or another solution,
you mix it up and the powder stays suspended in there.
It just doesn't actually ever become a clear liquid
that you can inject.
So in order to try injecting different strengths
of uric acid, he ended up using lithium
to assist in the dilution and lithium worked.
So what he basically was doing, again for you chemists,
is he was taking uric acid, he was adding lithium
and making a solution of lithium urate, okay?
This is a lot of details, but this is important
because what he eventually found
is that when he diluted the uric acid with lithium
and created lithium urate,
lithium urate could actually calm down these guinea pigs
that were injected with the toxic urea.
He also found that lithium urate
had a generally calming effect on these guinea pigs.
So now we're really off in crazy territory, right?
We're talking about urine from patients
that's separating out urea and uric acid.
We're adding lithium to the uric acid.
We're injecting this into guinea pigs.
This is getting pretty wild and pretty weird,
but this is medicine and from time to time,
this is medicine and science.
Cade was a good scientist
in addition to being a good physician.
And by good scientists,
I mean that he did control experiments.
Here he was injecting lithium urate
into animals and seeing an effect,
but he knew that that solution of lithium urate
contained not just the uric acid,
but it also contained lithium.
And so he quite appropriately asked,
maybe the lithium alone is having this calming effect
on these guinea pigs.
And indeed that was the case.
When he did the proper control experiment
and injected only lithium solution into these guinea pigs,
they calmed down.
From there, he in sort of 1940s style medicine,
this would not happen now,
he very quickly moved from that animal model
into human patients and started injecting human patients
with lithium or providing lithium orally to those patients.
And lo and behold, found an absolutely profound
and positive effect of lithium
in reducing symptoms of mania.
And as all good physician scientists do,
he wrote up his results.
And he wrote it up in a paper entitled
Lithium Salts in the Treatment of Psychotic Excitement.
Okay, back then they didn't call it mania,
they called it psychotic excitement.
This is a paper that was published September 3rd, 1949
in the Medical Journal of Australia.
We will provide a link to this study
is now a classic study in the field of psychiatry.
It's a really wonderful paper to read.
And actually I encourage people,
even if you're not a scientist or a clinician
to just take a quick look at the second page in this paper
that we've made available to you,
where he describes each of the various case studies
or the individuals that he looked at.
I'm not going to read these in detail now
because it would take a lot of unnecessary time,
but things like case seven, MC, aged 40 years old,
suffering from manic recurrent mania.
In this episode, he'd been excited,
restless and violent for over two months
and was interfering so often
that he had to be confined to a single room during the day.
So this is very debilitating,
what we now know to be bipolar depression.
He commenced taking lithium citrate 20 grains,
that's a measure of the amount of lithium,
three times a day.
In four days, he was distinctly quieter.
And by February 13th, 1949 appeared practically normal.
He continued well and on February 20th, 1949,
the dose of citrate was reduced to 10 grains,
et cetera, et cetera.
He left the hospital.
There are numerous descriptions of this sort
within this paper, including some descriptions of patients
that did not see such success
and including some descriptions of patients
that suffered from some negative side effects.
So that's important to point out as well,
but it's an absolutely wonderful paper
and it's an absolutely wonderful voyage
into the history of psychiatry,
right down to the discussion
where in just three short paragraphs,
Cade really lays out the case for why lithium
is such an important discovery in the treatment
of what at that time they were calling psychotic excitement
and what we now know to be manic bipolar depression.
Lithium, I should mention,
has a number of important features,
but also a number of important side effects
that need to be considered.
First of all, it does have a certain toxicity
and so levels of lithium in the blood
need to be monitored extremely carefully.
So it's not the sort of thing
that people can just take at a given dose
and every patient responds the same.
There's a lot of oversight
and a lot of blood tests that have to be done,
especially in the first three months of lithium treatment.
I should mention that lithium treatment is still used
to some great degree of success in many,
not all people suffering from bipolar depression
or bipolar disorder rather,
but there are a number of important things that happen
between 1949 and present day that prevented lithium
from reaching patients that really needed it.
And that all can be summarized
in two or three short sentences,
basically by virtue of the fact
that lithium is a naturally occurring element,
it could not be patented.
And as a consequence of that,
there wasn't a lot of potential profit for drug companies
to produce lithium, in fact, still to this day,
it's very low cost.
And still to this day,
no one really owns the patent for lithium
in its purest form.
So that made it unattractive.
It turns out that the FDA in the United States
didn't allow lithium to be used as a treatment
for manic bipolar disorder until 1970.
So we're talking about a full 21 years
from the publication of this paper
by Cade in the Medical Journal of Australia
showing quite beautifully the great potential
and use of lithium for quelling the symptoms
of bipolar disorder until the first patients
in the United States were starting
to access lithium regularly.
And nowadays, of course, lithium is available,
but still not able to be patented
because it's element number three on the periodic table,
it's naturally occurring.
It's not literally falling down from the stars
as stardust and going into pill form,
but rather it can be synthesized in laboratories,
but it is available.
It does show not only great potential in many patients,
but great application in many patients
despite its side effects.
So lithium really stands as this kind of golden example
of a treatment that works, at least in many individuals,
prior to an understanding of the biological basis
of the disease for which that treatment is needed.
Now, with that said, scientists and clinicians
have been quite rigorous in trying to understand
why and how lithium works in order to understand
the why and how of bipolar disorder.
This is the way that proper medicine and science is done.
Even if there's an excellent treatment for something,
it's important to understand why that treatment works
because first of all, not everyone responds
to that treatment.
Second of all, scientists and physicians understand
that just because we have one treatment that works,
if it has any side effects at all,
there is the possibility for better treatments.
So it's not just about trying to bypass a drug
that doesn't make much money for drug companies.
I know a lot of people think in those terms,
they think, oh, well, you know,
there's this continued search for better treatments
for bipolar disorder, even though lithium works
because lithium doesn't allow drug companies
to make much money.
That's not really the case.
The fact of the matter is, is that the toxicity,
some of the other issues that are created with lithium,
the fact that people need the ongoing blood testing,
et cetera, really stimulates the need,
really an urgent need for new and better treatments
for bipolar disorder.
And only by understanding how lithium works
at the cellular level, at the neural circuit level,
et cetera, do we really stand to find those new discoveries.
If you were to do a literature search
on the actions and mechanisms of lithium
in terms of how it can calm people down
and reduce their manic episodes,
you would find an enormous array of papers,
literally thousands of scientific studies
in animals and in humans, which, for instance,
will tell you that lithium treatment
will increase so-called BDNF,
brain-derived neutrophic factor.
BDNF is often talked about
in the context of neuroplasticity,
the brain and nervous system's ability to change
in response to experience.
And indeed, it does seem that ingesting lithium
increases BDNF.
BDNF is what we call permissive for neuroplasticity.
It doesn't create specific changes in the brain,
meaning it's not going to make your memory better
or your coordination better
or your emotional state better per se.
What BDNF does is it permits the neurons, the nerve cells,
and their connections in the brain
to be more likely to change
if the proper environmental conditions are met.
That is, BDNF creates a kind of buoyancy
to neuroplasticity.
It opens the gates to neuroplasticity.
So lithium does increase BDNF.
We'll talk about why that's important
in the context of the neural circuits involved
with bipolar disorder in a few minutes.
It also seems to be a potent anti-inflammatory.
Now, inflammation is one of those words
that's thrown around extensively nowadays,
especially on social media
and especially as it relates to any health condition.
It's like inflammation, inflammation, inflammation
always seems to be discussed
in the context of inflammation being bad.
But I do want to point out
that inflammation is a natural adaptive response
to physical injury to a cell or organ or tissue of any kind.
Inflammation is the basis
by which adaptations occur to exercise.
So for instance, you were to weight train
and use a heavier than normal weight
and do a set to failure
or create some little micro tears in the muscle
that are healthy in the sense
that they would create adaptations
and make that muscle stronger, maybe even grow that muscle.
There's an inflammatory response associated with that
that is critical to the positive adaptation.
So inflammation isn't always bad,
although excessive or as we say, runaway inflammation is bad.
Lithium seems to be able to suppress inflammation
and importantly, it can suppress inflammation
in neural tissues and within the brain in particular.
That is important and we will return to that
and why it's important in a little bit.
The other thing about lithium
is that lithium is neuroprotective.
That is, it can prevent neurons from dying
under certain conditions.
Why would neurons die?
Well, there are a lot of reasons why neurons can die.
There can be a physical insult to the neurons.
You can get hit really hard in the head.
A bullet, God forbid, can enter the skull and kill neurons.
There are a lot of reasons why neurons can die.
Neuroprotection is a situation
in which a neuron is given some sort of chemical
or physical resiliency
that allows it to suffer an insult and yet bounce back.
So it's very similar to the way
that we think about psychological resiliency.
Neuroprotection is an ability for neurons
to be better able to handle stress of different kinds.
In particular, excitotoxicity.
There's a phenomenon in bipolar disorder
and a lot of other psychiatric conditions
in which hyperactivity of certain brain areas
actually starts to kill off neurons.
Hyperactivity doesn't always do this,
but it turns out that if certain brain circuits
are too active for too long,
some of the chemicals associated with neuronal activity,
things like calcium and neurotransmitters like glutamate,
can actually kill the very neurons that are active.
So it seems that lithium can prevent
some of that neurotoxicity.
Now, this turns out to be particularly important
for this discussion about bipolar disorder
and the neural circuit basis of bipolar disorder,
because if we were to just take a step back and ask,
what's different in the brains
of people with bipolar disorder?
There are some very interesting answers that start to emerge.
There are basically two main neural circuits
that are present in normal individuals.
I say normal, I say that respectfully
to the people with bipolar disorder
by referring to people who do not suffer
from manic episodes or from manic depression.
There are circuits that are present
in people with bipolar disorder
and in people that do not suffer from bipolar disorder.
Both of those circuits do the same thing
in both sets of individuals.
And yet in people with bipolar disorder,
there seems to be an atrophy
or a removal of certain neural connections over time
that leads to a situation
in which people with bipolar disorder become very poor
at registering their own internal state,
in particular, their emotional states
and their somatic states.
What we're referring to here
is something called interoception.
I've talked about this a little bit
on the Huberman Lab podcast before,
but there are two modes of perception.
Perception, of course, is a attention
to something that's happening in our environment
or to us on or within our body.
Exteroception is literally an attention
to things that are happening beyond the confines
of our skin.
So seeing that person's face over there
or seeing that color of leaf over there
or hearing a sound over to my left.
That is exteroception,
perception of things beyond the confines of one's skin.
Then there's interoception,
which is perception of things that are happening internally,
like how full does my gut feel?
How fast is my heart beating?
Some people can measure that quite accurately
just by thinking about it.
Other people can't.
How happy am I?
How sad am I?
How energetic am I?
How lethargic am I?
Et cetera, et cetera.
So we are always existing in a balance
between exteroception and interoception.
But as it turns out,
people with bipolar disorder over time,
and especially into the second and third decade
of having bipolar disorder,
seem to have progressively diminished levels
of interoception.
And that very likely is important
in their inability to register, for instance,
that, wow, they are talking at an excessive rate
or they haven't slept in five or even 10 days,
or they haven't eaten in a long period of time.
This atrophy of neural circuits for interoception
is starting to emerge
as one of the defining neural circuit characteristics
or underpinnings of bipolar.
Now, I bridged to this conversation about neural circuits
from the statement that lithium can protect
against some of the neurotoxic effects
of neural circuits being very active.
Now, this can get a little bit complicated,
but I promise I'm going to make it clear
for any of you that are watching and or listening.
The reality is that people with bipolar depression
very likely have a hyperactivity,
that is an increased level of activity
in certain circuits within the brain
early in the expression of their disease.
And that typically, as I mentioned earlier,
sets in around the early 20s,
although sometimes that can be even earlier
in the teens and so forth.
But that hyperactivity, we think, leads to a toxicity,
an excitotoxicity of certain elements of the neural circuits
that are responsible for interoception.
In other words, the overuse of certain circuits
can lead to a diminishing, an atrophy,
or even a death of certain elements within those circuits.
And it appears that lithium,
through its anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects,
and through its ability to increase BDNF,
very likely protects us against some of that atrophy
of those circuits for interoception.
So this isn't a case in which, you know,
people with bipolar have a neural circuit
or lack a neural circuit,
and people without bipolar are the opposite.
This is a case in which everyone
more or less starts out the same,
but it seems that there's a hyperactivity
of certain neural circuits in people with bipolar disorder
that over time actually causes those circuits to diminish.
Now, this is very important
because some of the more recent longitudinal studies
doing brain imaging on people with bipolar disorder
and those without, and doing that over time
in patients starting as early as their teens,
but into their 20s and 30s,
reveals just that,
that there can be hyperactivity of circuits early on,
but then hypo, reduced activity of those very same circuits
at a time five or 10 years later.
Again, this speaks to the complicated nature
of bipolar disorder and the complicated nature of psychiatry
and linking specific psychiatric disorders
to neural circuits in general.
Because if you have a situation in which, you know,
in one disease, let's just hypothesize here for a second
that for instance, in certain forms of schizophrenia,
there's elevated dopamine,
and were we to just reduce the amount of dopamine
that they would receive relief
from those schizophrenic symptoms?
Well, that's all pretty straightforward on the face of it.
But in this situation with bipolar disorder,
what we're talking about is hyperactivity, too much activity,
leading to hypoactivity through death
of those very circuits.
And so now you can especially appreciate why
when the patient shows up to the psychiatrist
or when the psychiatrist shows up to the patient
in the total course of their disease
is going to be very important.
And then layer on top of that the complexity of the fact
that the very defining characteristic of bipolar disorder
is that there are oscillations in mood.
So now we need to think about treatments
not just for the manic episodes,
but also treatments for the depressive episodes.
And that's in fact what psychiatrists do.
Turns out that they apply different treatments
or combinations of treatments
for patients that are in manic episodes
versus depressive episodes.
And they have to infer all that from discussions.
Again, just exchange of words,
depending on when that person walked into their office,
where they are in terms of manic episodes,
no symptomology or depressive symptomology,
and whether or not they've had that symptomology
for an extended period of time.
And then just to make the situation even more complicated,
the very circuits that atrophy
that start to wane and disappear
in people with bipolar disorder
are the circuits for interoception,
for understanding of what's going on in one's own body.
So you can imagine if you sit down and ask somebody,
well, how long has it been since you slept?
That person may genuinely not know.
Or if you ask the very depressed person,
how depressed are you?
That person may not be able to articulate that.
So fortunately, there are solutions to this.
And the solution is that more often than not,
the accurate understanding of whether or not
someone has bipolar depression or not,
and what stage of the illness they might be in or not
is going to depend on the reports of people around them
and not the patient themselves.
Hence, the importance of having a rather detailed
and admittedly a rather intense discussion
about the symptomology of bipolar disorder
so that you can have an understanding
of the people around you and have an eye and an ear
to whether or not those people
might be suffering from bipolar,
and if so, at what stage of the disease
they might happen to be at.
Now I'd like to talk a little bit more
about what is known about the neural circuits
that lead to the manic states,
as well as the depressive states,
but mainly the manic states of bipolar disorder.
We already discussed the fact that interoception,
registering of one's own internal emotions
and bodily states is diminished
in people with bipolar disorder,
but we haven't really talked about the neural circuits
that are responsible for that lack of recognition.
For that reason, I'd like to point out a paper.
This is a fairly recent paper, just came out this year,
but it's an excellent one
looking at the changes over time in neural circuitry
in people with high genetic risk for bipolar disorder,
and in particular, in young people.
And studies of this sort are rare,
but are exceedingly important because of the fact
that they track individuals over time.
The title of this paper is
Longitudinal Changes in Structural Connectivity
in Young People at High Genetic Risk for Bipolar Disorder.
We will provide a link to this study
in the show note captions.
There are a lot of data in this paper,
in particular, neuroimaging data,
and it's quite extensive in terms of analyzing
the so-called connectomics.
You've probably heard of genomics,
which is the analysis of genes and their display
in different individuals or different animals, et cetera.
You have proteomics, which is the display of
or the existence of different proteins.
So omics is a big thing now in science.
You kind of throw omics behind anything
and it becomes its own Wikipedia page,
which means it becomes its own thing.
So to speak, I say that only partially in jest.
Nonetheless, connectomics is the analysis of connections
between different neurons and neural circuit elements.
And what this paper really showed
by analyzing the connectomics of neural circuits
in the brains of many different people
with different categories of and onset of
and severity of bipolar disorder,
as well as controls in different age groups, et cetera,
is that people who are a particularly high risk
for having bipolar disorder
or that have full-blown bipolar disorder
have deficits and actually reductions
in the amount of connectivity
between what are called the parietal brain regions
and the limbic system.
Now, the limbic system I've talked about before
in this podcast, if you're not familiar with it,
I'll explain what it is in a moment.
It's simply a collection of brain structures,
not one brain structure,
but a collection of brain structures
that generally are responsible
for shifting the overall state that we're in
from states of more relaxed and calm
to states of more alert and focused.
The limbic system is intimately related
to the so-called autonomic nervous system,
which regulates our sleep-wake cycles
and a number of other things like our digestion, et cetera,
our level of hunger and on and on.
So the limbic system is really kind of like a volume control
or as nerd scientists like to say,
a kind of game control on the overall level
or amplitude of alertness or calmness.
In fact, if we're very, very calm,
we are asleep or even more calm, we can be in a coma.
If we are very alert, we can be wide awake
and ready to work and run, et cetera.
Or if we are very, very, very alert
by way of limbic autonomic interactions,
well, then we can be in anxiety,
we can be in full-blown panic attack, or we can be in mania.
We can have so much energy
that we feel like we don't need to sleep.
And in fact, disruptions in the circuitry
really seems to be what's going on
in people who have bipolar disorder.
Now, if disruptions in the circuitry
are present in the limbic system,
that doesn't necessarily mean that the limbic system
is at fault because the way that neural circuits work
is that different brain areas are talking to one another
through electrical chemical signaling
and they are regulating one another.
And what this paper really tells us
is that there are elements within the parietal lobe,
which is a kind of a section of the brain
that sits off to the side.
It's not really off to the side,
but in neuroanatomical nomenclature,
the parietal lobe is connected in two ways, bidirectionally.
So parietal lobe is connecting to limbic system
and limbic system is connecting to parietal lobe.
And in people with bipolar disorder,
it seems that the parietal lobe
is able to exert less top-down control,
that is less suppression
of certain elements of the limbic system,
which at least right now is leading researchers
to hypothesize that the limbic system
is sort of revving at higher levels.
It's kind of like RPM in your cars
or kind of redlining at times and for durations
that are inappropriate or at least abnormal.
So we have two major sets of neural circuit deficits
or changes in people with bipolar.
Their lack of internal awareness is reduced
and that turns out to be by way of neural structures
like the insula, which is a brain region
that is connected in a very direct way
to our somatosensory cortex,
so the part of our cortex that registers how we feel,
literally, sense of touch and internal state.
So those circuits, excuse me,
for those of you listening, I just bumped the microphone,
excuse me, those circuits are disrupted
in people with bipolar and the top-down control,
the kind of accelerator and brake
on our overall levels of energy are also disrupted.
Now, that's all fine and good because, well, it's true,
at least according to what the data
at this point in time tell us,
there may be new discoveries to come,
but that all seems to be the case,
but it doesn't tell us how to modulate
or change that circuitry.
It also doesn't tell us how something like lithium
can actually benefit a large number of patients
or how a good number of the other treatments
for bipolar disorder, which we'll talk about going forward,
can benefit patients with bipolar.
So it appears that lithium is exerting its positive effects
on bipolar depression treatment, at least in part,
by preventing the loss of certain neural circuits,
namely the neural circuits for interoception
and the top-down control over the limbic system.
Now, it turns out that by examining lithium's effects
at an even more reductionist level,
we can gain really important insight
into what's going on in bipolar depression
and some of the other treatments for bipolar depression,
including behavioral treatments,
things like transcranial magnetic stimulation,
and even some of the more natural
or so-called nutraceutical treatments,
including things like high-dose omega-3 supplementation,
which we're going to talk about extensively.
Now, in order to understand
what we're going to talk about next,
it's important that everybody understand
a key concept of neuroplasticity.
And this is a key concept,
regardless of whether or not
one is talking about bipolar depression.
In fact, it's something I think everybody,
every citizen of Earth should know about,
and that's called homeostatic plasticity.
Homeostatic plasticity is a particular form
of neuroplasticity in which if a neural circuit
is overactive for a period of time,
there are changes that occur at the cellular level
that lead to a balance or a homeostatic regulation
of that circuit so that it's no longer overactive.
Conversely, if a neural circuit is underactive
for a period of time,
certain changes happen within the cells of that circuit
to ramp up their activity
or make them more likely to be active.
And whether or not a neural circuit
and the neurons within it become more active
or less active in the context of homeostatic plasticity
largely depends on one mechanism,
and it's a beautiful mechanism
that I'll make very clear to you right now
even if you don't have a background in biology.
Neurons communicate with one another
by releasing so-called neurotransmitters,
which are just chemicals.
Those neurotransmitters are vomited out.
They're not actually vomited,
but they're spit out into the so-called synaptic cleft,
often called the synapse.
The synapse is just a little gap between neurons.
And when they are released into the synapse,
they don't just stay there.
They actually park or bind to receptors
on what's called the postsynaptic neuron.
And depending on how many receptors they bind to
and how many receptors are available, et cetera,
they can have a greater or lesser effect
on the postsynaptic neuron.
This scenario of neurotransmitters
being released into synapses,
then binding to receptors on postsynaptic neurons
and influencing the electrical excitability
of those postsynaptic neurons,
sits central to not just the treatment of bipolar disorder,
but to all treatments of all psychiatric conditions
and indeed to things like neuropathic pain as well.
For example, the so-called SSRIs,
Prozac, Zoloft, and others, et cetera,
stands for selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
What does that mean?
Well, serotonin is a neurotransmitter.
It's actually a neuromodulator
that's released into the synapse.
And then the SSRI,
the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor,
allows more of that serotonin
to sit within the synapse for longer, right?
It's a reuptake inhibitor.
It prevents reuptake by the presynaptic neuron.
And that serotonin therefore can park in
or dock in the receptors, as it's called,
of the postsynaptic neuron in greater numbers
and have a greater impact on that postsynaptic neuron.
So the drugs that are used to treat depression
or other things of that sort, things like SSRIs,
work by changing the availability
of neurotransmitter in the synapse.
Other things like MAO inhibitors,
monoamine oxidase inhibitors, work a different way.
They inhibit the enzyme.
Anytime you hear ASE in biology,
it's very likely an enzyme which breaks things down.
So MAO inhibitors prevent the breakdown,
not the reuptake, but the breakdown of neurotransmitter,
and therefore allow more neurotransmitter
to be available in the synapse
and influence the postsynaptic cell.
Homeostatic plasticity is a form of neuroplasticity
in which overall circuits can become much more excitable
or much less excitable
by the addition of more receptors in the postsynaptic neuron
or by the removal of more receptors
from the postsynaptic neuron.
And the way this happens is just beautiful.
It was first discovered in the visual system,
and the person primarily responsible
for the discovery of homeostatic plasticity,
although there are several,
is a woman by the name of Gina Turgiano.
She's a professor at Brandeis University.
And what the Turgiano laboratory showed was that,
for instance, if we are in the dark
for a long period of time,
literally, we're not seeing much for a long period of time,
there's an increase in the number of receptors
in the postsynaptic neurons
so that a smaller amount of light
and excitability within the visual system
can lead to greater amounts of activity
in the visual system.
Conversely, if there's an overactivity
or an increase in the activity in the visual system
for some period of time,
then a number of receptors in the postsynaptic neuron
are removed from that postsynaptic neuron surface,
making any neurotransmitter that's available
only able to bind the receptors that are left
and have less of an influence on those cells.
In other words, keeping a circuit
in so-called homeostatic balance
in a particular range of excitability.
Now, while that's a mouthful and an earful
and a conceptful, I don't know if a conceptful is a word,
but in any case, that's a lot to think about,
but all you need to know is that if a neural circuit
is very active for a period of time,
in normal individuals,
there will be a reduction in the amount of activity
by way of removing receptors that bind neurotransmitter.
Whereas if a neural circuit is very quiet,
it's not activated for a period of time,
maybe your leg is in a cast, for instance,
and you're not activating your quadricep and calves
very much well, when that cast comes off,
sure, the muscle might be atrophied,
but the nerves that connect to that muscle
are actually in a position to influence that muscle
even more once you start using that muscle or those muscles,
because whatever neurotransmitter is released
now has the opportunity to bind to more receptors,
in that case, in muscle,
or in the case of brain circuits in postsynaptic neurons.
So homeostatic plasticity is this beautiful
balancing mechanism that makes sure that neural circuits
are never too active nor too quiet for too long.
And in a beautiful display of how treatments
can lead to a better understanding of biology,
which can lead to the discovery of even better treatments,
lithium and another compound,
which we'll talk about ketamine,
seem to exert their actions largely through effects
on homeostatic neuroplasticity.
There's a wonderful paper that describes
all the nitty gritty of this.
Certainly most people listening, I'm guessing,
are not going to be interested in all this detail,
but for those of you that you are,
and you want to delve deep into this,
this paper was published in Neuron, Cell Press Journal,
excellent journal.
It's titled Targeting Homeostatic Plasticity
for the Treatment of Mood Disorders.
And there's one particular figure in this paper
that I'll just describe to you
in which measurements were made from neurons
and the number of receptors in those neurons.
It's done somewhat indirectly through a method
that's detailed and neuroscientists are familiar with.
Basically what it measures is how excited a given neuron is,
electrically excited a given neuron is
to a given amount of neurotransmitter, okay?
So the amount of neurotransmitter
that's vomited onto a neuron
is essentially kept constant,
and then the response of the postsynaptic neuron
is measured.
So it can be of one level or higher or lower
depending on homeostatic plasticity.
And what this paper shows,
and what's been shown over and over again,
is that when neurons are exposed to lithium
for a period of time,
there is a reduction in the excitability
of the postsynaptic neuron.
That is, neurons within the brain become less excitable
over time if lithium is present,
whereas ketamine, which is now a common FDA approved,
at least in the US,
it's approved for the treatment of major depression,
ketamine does the opposite.
Ketamine seems to increase the number of receptors
in the postsynaptic neuron
and lead to greater levels of excitability
and electrical activity within neural circuits
to a given fixed amount of neurotransmitter.
So this is super interesting
because what it means is that lithium
is causing circuits to be less active.
Ketamine is causing circuits to be more active.
And we know from excellent clinical data now
that ketamine seems to be a very effective treatment
for major depression
and for the major depressive episodes
of people that suffer from bipolar depression
that includes these major depressive episodes
of two weeks or longer of suppressed mood,
appetite, sleep issues, et cetera.
Now, the key thing about ketamine
that's often not discussed
is that while its effects are very potent,
they are transient.
So one major drawback to ketamine therapy for depression
is that it has to be done repeatedly.
And how repeatedly or how often rather depends, of course,
on a discussion between the psychiatrist and the patient.
This is not something to cowboy on your own.
I know that, and many of you are probably familiar
with the fact that ketamine also is abused recreationally.
It is a so-called NMDA,
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist.
So it blocks the very receptor
that's responsible for neuroplasticity
for changes in neural circuits.
It also changes excitability in neurons,
as I just described.
So ketamine is a very potent chemical
that has been shown over and over again
and is now FDA approved for the treatment
of major depression,
but its effects seem to be transient.
Lithium, as I described earlier,
seems to reduce the manic episodes
or the intensity of manic episodes and symptomology
in people with bipolar disorder.
It's doing that through neural protection.
So protecting neural circuits from dying away
that initially are overactive
and that overactivity causing excitotoxicity.
It blocks that excitotoxicity, we believe.
And it seems to do that in part
by diminishing the amount of activity in those circuits.
So this is a beautiful mechanistic story,
and it's the sort of story that you'd love to have
for a great number of psychiatric illnesses.
And fortunately, we have for bipolar disorder.
Overactivity of a given circuit
eventually leads to neurotoxicity, excuse me.
Lithium is preventing that neurotoxicity
by reducing the number of receptors
in certain elements within those circuits,
so-called homeostatic scaling.
It's down-regulating the number of receptors,
leading to less excitability
and preventing, we think, excitotoxicity.
And in that sense,
you can see exactly why it's important
to get lithium treatment in there early
for people with bipolar disorder.
Ketamine as a treatment for major depression
seems to be effective but transient.
And you can also see why it would be important
not just to reduce the manic episodes
for people with bipolar disorder
but to also treat the depressive episodes.
So this is a key feature of the treatment
for bipolar depression and for bipolar disorder.
There needs to be treatment both of the mania
and of the depressive episodes if they're present.
And fortunately, there are excellent drugs to do that.
And I should mention that ketamine and lithium
are just two of the drugs within the kit
that psychiatrists have access to.
There are many things, olanzapines
and a number of different things, including clozapine.
Clozapine is an antipsychotic,
which is commonly prescribed as a sedative in some cases
that allows people in manic episodes to sleep.
It's classically described
as so-called dopamine receptor four antagonist,
although it does other things as well.
Clozapine has a number of side effect features
related to white blood cell and things of that sort
that require careful monitoring.
So there are an enormous number now,
literally dozens and dozens of different drugs,
each designed to target either the manic phase,
the depressive phase, or some what we call acute,
sort of early phases versus ongoing treatments.
This is a vast galaxy of drug treatments
that really should be navigated,
I should say absolutely should be navigated
by a board certified psychiatrist.
And of course, in close discussion
with both the person suffering from bipolar disorder,
but also ideally the family members
of the person suffering from bipolar disorder.
But I think at least up until now,
we've focused on the two major pathways for treatment,
lithium and ketamine.
And we talked about why lithium and ketamine work,
that they're working on opposite ends
of this homeostatic scaling.
We talked a bit about the circuits that are involved
in generating what we think are the manic symptomology
and the lack of interoception,
why people can just persist in staying awake,
awake, awake, not eating, et cetera.
Now you have in mind how all that is put together.
And I think you have in mind
some of the well-demonstrated treatments
for the different component parts of bipolar disorder,
which now I'm hoping you're also well versed in
based on our early, early discussion
of what constitutes bipolar one and bipolar two.
Now I would like to also talk about
some of the not so typical therapeutics
for bipolar disorder,
and also point to the things that have been tried and failed
for successful treatment of bipolar disorder,
because some of those things are often talked about
and suggested, especially in online communities.
And while it's not clear that any of them
are particularly hazardous on their own,
although some of them do carry some hazards,
I do think it's important
because of the critical time-sensitive nature
of bipolar disorder and the urgency
of getting treatments early
to try and prevent some of the longer lasting
neural circuit changes,
that if people can avoid some of the less effective
or demonstrated to be ineffective treatments,
that they stand to combat bipolar disorder
much more successfully.
First of all, a key point about drug therapies
versus non-drug therapies or talk therapies.
Without question,
drug therapies are going to be most effective
when done also with talk therapies.
And we'll talk about which talk therapies
have been demonstrated to be most effective.
There is some argument about what I'm about to say next,
but in general, most psychiatrists will tell you,
or certainly the ones I've spoken to have told me,
that talk therapy on its own is rarely, if ever,
effective for bipolar depression and bipolar disorder,
whether or not it's BP1 or BP2.
That's just the reality of it.
Contrast that with our discussion
about obsessive compulsive disorder,
which we talked about a few episodes ago.
If you haven't seen that episode,
we have an in-depth episode all about OCD
and obsessive compulsive personality disorder.
There, it seems that drug therapies and talk therapies
can be done independently or in combination.
As expected, combined drug and talk therapies
are more effective there than either one alone,
but there are pretty impressive effects
of talk therapy alone,
provided that they are initiated at the right time
and it's the right form of talk therapy.
That's OCD, but in terms of bipolar disorder,
it really seems that the drug therapies are necessary,
at least in most all cases.
That said, talk therapies are a terrific augment
or support for those drug therapies
and sometimes can allow people to take lower doses
of those drug therapies,
which turns out to be important
because of the side effect profiles
of a lot of drug therapies
and sometimes the cost as well.
I guess we can think of cost
just as another side effect, really.
There are both established and more novel forms
of talk therapy being used, again,
in concert with drug treatments for bipolar disorder.
Cognitive behavioral therapy is the one
that seems to be best,
at least by way of the statistics and papers that exist.
It's also the one that's been explored the most.
So one of the reasons why it's often considered
the most popular or effective
is because it's also been around longer
and it's been explored the most cognitive behavioral therapy
in general is a progressive exposure of the patient
in a very controlled way in a clinical setting
to some of the triggers or the conditions
that would exacerbate bipolar disorder.
Now, earlier I said borderline personality disorder
has all these triggers and triggered elements
from the external environment,
whereas bipolar disorder does not.
And that's still true,
but it is the case that somebody with bipolar
can have worse symptoms
if life conditions get worse or more stressful.
So cognitive behavioral therapy in the discussion about,
and sometimes the direct exposure
to anxiety provoking elements of life
can be very helpful for adjusting the responses
to those otherwise triggering events
and sometimes making the drug treatments more effective
even at lower doses.
There are also forms of therapy
including family focused therapy,
which is especially important in terms of bipolar disorder
because family members,
provided that they are not themselves in a manic episode
due to the close heritability of bipolar disorder,
but family members can often be excellent windows
into whether or not somebody is doing well or poorly
or is veering toward or is emerging
from a manic or depressive episode
because they understand that person.
They have a lot of data.
It could be purely subjective data,
but they have a lot of exposure
to how long or well somebody has been sleeping
or eating, et cetera.
So family focused therapy involves other members
of the person suffering from bipolar disorders family,
as well as conversations about family members
in a way that helps patients with bipolar disorder navigate
not just through manic episodes and depressive episodes,
but start to learn to predict what are the conditions,
psychological, physical, and otherwise,
that can trigger bipolar episodes.
And then there's a category of therapy
called interpersonal and social rhythm therapy.
This is deserving of its own entire episode, really.
Interpersonal and social rhythm therapy
is sort of an expansion on family focused therapy,
although it's distinct in certain ways as well,
and really focuses on how people are relating
to others in their life and in the workplace
and in the school environment
and also within the family, et cetera.
And I should say that a overall theme
that's emerging in psychiatry and psychology
is to start wherever possible
to incorporate more of the social aspects
and the interpersonal aspects.
In other words, not just talking to and examining a patient
as one biological system, one nervous system,
one set of chemicals and one life,
but rather a set of chemicals, neural circuits,
and a life that's embedded in the chemicals
and neural circuits and lives of other people.
Just by way of example, you can imagine that
if somebody is in a very healthy relationship
or a very abusive relationship,
that that's going to strongly impact
the outcomes of manic episodes.
You can imagine that if the financial situation
is one in which people can recover from manic episodes,
I did mention this earlier, but I should have, forgive me,
that oftentimes people who are in a manic episode
will go out and spend immense amounts of money
that they simply cannot afford to lose.
And then the depressive episodes that in many cases follow
are made far worse by the financial anxiety
and the financial stress that results
from those manic episodes of spending, et cetera.
And then of course, this carries over to sexual promiscuity
where people might be dealing with unwanted pregnancy
or STIs or very fractured interpersonal dynamics
with existing or new relationships.
I mean, you can imagine how these manic episodes
as well as the depressive episodes can really wick out
into an enormous amount of destruction,
which brings us back to the initial criteria of BP1 and BP2
is that these manic episodes are not a good thing.
These depressive episodes are not a good thing.
They create this sense of euphoria
in the person experiencing mania,
or they create the sense that anything is possible,
but at the end of the day, and actually every day,
these episodes are quite maladaptive.
They really destroy people's lives
and it's not just the life of the person
that's suffering from bipolar disorder.
And so hence, cognitive behavioral therapy,
family-focused therapy,
and interpersonal and social rhythm therapies
are the primary three talk therapies
that are most often combined with drug therapies
in order to try and really reduce the harm.
It's really all about harm reduction
from manic episodes and depressive episodes.
One very exciting and emerging treatment
that does show great promise,
and in some cases, great outcomes for bipolar disorder
is, believe it or not, electric shock therapy.
Electric shock therapy may sound barbaric,
and in fact, it tends to look barbaric,
although this is done in the controlled setting
of a hospital.
If any of you have seen One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest,
the final scene or near final scene in that movie
was Jack Nicholson with the sort of bite protector
in his mouth and getting electric shock therapy,
and it's, as the name suggests,
it's kind of inducing a global seizure,
either low-level or grand mal-type seizure
in the patient's brain and nervous system.
You might ask, well, why would one want to do that?
Well, it turns out that this is a well-established
and in many cases, very effective treatment
for major depression.
Electric shock therapy is generally used
for treatment-resistant depression,
so these are people that have no positive response
or ongoing positive response to drug therapies
or other therapies.
Electric shock therapy is thought to work primarily
by stimulating the massive kind of indiscriminate release
of things like serotonin, dopamine, acetylcholine,
a huge variety of neuromodulators,
as well as things like BDNF,
brain-derived neurotrophic factor,
which then allows neuroplasticity to take place.
Again, BDNF being permissive for neuroplasticity.
The problem with ECT is that it's really only useful
for treatment-resistant depression.
It doesn't actually target the manic aspects
of bipolar depression and bipolar disorder,
but nonetheless is used when drug treatments don't work.
Some of the negatives of electric shock therapy
or electroconvulsive therapy, ECT,
is the proper acronym and way it's described,
is that it's quite invasive, right?
This is something that you need to go to the hospital for
and oftentimes there's some inpatient care required
after the electric shock convulsive therapy.
It's a fairly high cost,
especially for those that don't have insurance.
And of course it requires anesthesia.
For most people, that's not going to be a problem,
but for many people that could be a problem.
And there's often some associated memory loss.
And so the memory loss,
the invasive nature of ECT and the cost
oftentimes rule out ECT for most patients.
And that's why it's sort of a late stage
or kind of last resort type thing
for treatment-resistant depression.
Nowadays, ketamine type therapy is done repeatedly
or other treatments.
For instance, transcranial magnetic stimulation,
which is basically noninvasive.
It's a coil that's placed on the outside of the skull,
excuse me.
And we can more accurately refer to it as repetitive
or RTMS, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation is a tool
that allows researchers and clinicians
to reduce the amount of activity in specific neural circuits.
So they can actually target the magnetic field
to particular neural circuits
to reduce activity in those neural circuits.
Again, it's minimally invasive.
It has been shown to be effective
in both increasing neuroplasticity in positive ways,
as well as reducing depressive episodes.
And in a few instances in reducing the amplitude
or the intensity of manic episodes
in people with bipolar disorder.
The problem is it's still a very early technique.
There aren't a lot of clinics and labs doing it.
I'm starting to see more advertisements,
literally commercial clinics that are advertising RTMS or TMS
I encourage you to approach those clinics with caution.
I'm of the mind that if those clinics
are not either closely or maybe even distantly associated
with a research institution
that's really up on the latest of RTMS,
you'd be wise to at least do your research, right?
And explore, talk to other patients
who've done these treatments.
But certainly in university hospitals
and in clinical settings and research settings,
RTMS is being used as a way to, for instance,
reduce the activity of certain limbic circuitries
so that people are just overall less excitable and manic.
Or to activate,
because it can also be used for activation now,
certain neural circuits activate, for instance,
the parietal inputs,
the top-down control over the limbic system.
This is all happening right now.
So we have ECT, repetitive TMS or RTMS.
And then as I mentioned earlier, ketamine therapies,
most of those are targeted
toward the depressive aspects of manic depression.
So for people with bipolar disorder
that doesn't include depression,
those are going to be less effective.
But overall, it's going to be the talk therapies
of the sort that we discussed earlier or a moment ago,
plus drug treatments,
almost always lithium will be explored,
plus some treatments for the depressive episodes,
in particular, if those depressive episodes are present.
Nowadays, there's a lot of excitement about psilocybin,
which is a psychedelic.
In the US, psilocybin is still illegal.
It is not legal,
meaning you can get in a lot of trouble for possessing it,
certainly for selling it, et cetera.
But psilocybin is being explored as a clinical therapy
in certain laboratory settings,
in particular, at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.
It's being explored in human patients
for the treatment of major depression,
for OCD, I believe, as well,
but certainly for major depression
and for eating disorders.
And it seems from the initial wave of publications
from that work done by the incredible Matthew Johnson
or Dr. Matthew Johnson,
who was a guest on this podcast before.
He's also been on the Tim Ferriss podcast.
He's been on the Lex Friedman podcast.
Dr. Matthew Johnson came on this podcast
and talked about some of the work with psilocybin
for the treatment of depression.
Very impressive results there.
And as you can imagine,
very impressive results
for the major depressive episodes for bipolar.
However, at least to my knowledge,
again, to my knowledge,
there have not been any controlled clinical trials
exploring psilocybin
for the mania associated with bipolar disorder.
If someone out there is aware of those clinical trials,
please let me know.
I'll do an update in a future podcast.
But right now, no knowledge from me
about psilocybin clinical trials
for the manic component of bipolar disorder.
A number of people are probably also going to wonder
about whether or not cannabis or medical marijuana
is useful for bipolar disorder.
To address this, I looked to some previous lectures
and some clinicians at Stanford Psychiatry.
This question was asked of them.
And as it turns out,
cannabis does not seem to be effective
for the treatment of the manic phases of bipolar disorder
or for the treatment of the major depressive component.
The only treatment perhaps,
or I should say the only situation perhaps
in which it might be useful,
and this is what was relayed to me,
is that it may help with sleep
in certain people that are having trouble with insomnia.
Although nowadays it's far more common
for people in manic episodes
to prescribe things like trazodone or other benzos,
benzodiazepines,
in order to try and get sleep within the manic episodes.
And benzodiazepines and trazodone, et cetera,
work largely through the so-called GABA system.
This is a neurotransmitter
that causes reductions in excitability of neurons,
hence why it's being used to try and calm people down
and allow them to sleep during their manic episodes.
So not a lot, or essentially no data,
supporting the use of cannabis
for the treatment of bipolar disorder per se,
nor data supporting the use of psilocybin
for the treatment of bipolar disorder per se.
But I realized as I say that,
that there are going to be a number of people
that may have had positive
or negative experiences with cannabis or psilocybin
as they relate to bipolar disorder.
So please, if you're willing or comfortable,
put that if you're comfortable
into the comment section on YouTube.
And of course, if you are aware of any studies
on cannabis or psilocybin showing positive outcomes
for the treatment of bipolar disorder,
please provide links or PubMed ideas to those.
I'd love to peruse those studies.
There are two naturopathic,
or I should say nutrition supplement-based approaches
to bipolar disorder they get talked about a lot.
And one of them shows some interesting promise
or effectiveness even in a limited context.
Before marching into this description
of these two compounds,
in fact, before even mentioning these two compounds,
I do want to emphasize what's been said
and written about over and over again,
and what was relayed to me from expert psychiatrists.
It is not wise to rely purely on talk therapy
or on natural approaches
to the treatment of bipolar disorder,
given the intensity of the disorder
and the high propensity for suicide risk
in people with bipolar disorder.
It is a chemical and neural circuit disruption,
and it needs to be dealt with head on
through the appropriate chemistry
and prescription drug approaches
from a board certified psychiatrist.
I don't say this to protect me.
I say this truly to protect those who either suffer from
or think they may suffer from bipolar disorder
if you know someone who you think might suffer
from bipolar disorder.
Now, all that is not to say
that there aren't useful lifestyle interventions
that can support people with bipolar disorder.
So I just briefly want to mention those.
And again, I'm lifting the statements I'm about to make
from some excellent online lectures
from psychiatrists at Stanford and elsewhere,
which essentially say that of course, of course, of course,
getting better sleep, getting adequate exercise,
getting proper nutrition,
having quality, healthy social interactions,
even getting regular sunlight in the day
and avoiding bright light at night,
all of those things are going to braid together
to support the nervous system
and the psyche of somebody with bipolar disorder,
but they braid together to support the psyche
and the neurochemistry and the neural circuits
of anybody and everybody.
So they have generally a modulatory effect.
That is they're indirectly shifting the likelihood
that somebody might have an episode
or the intensity of an episode,
in particular, the depressive episodes, right?
You can imagine how someone
who's heading into a depressive episode,
maybe they're on a lower amount of medication
or they haven't yet medicated
for the depressive episode of bipolar.
And now they're making sure,
or their family is making sure
that they're getting exercise, sunshine,
eating correctly, social engagement, et cetera.
Of course, it makes perfect sense
why they would have perhaps a shallower drop into depression
or maybe even offset a depressive episode.
That said, most all, if not all people
with bipolar disorder are likely to need
some sort of drug therapy intervention
in order to help them.
So lifestyle factors are always important
in all individuals,
those suffering from psychiatric conditions or not.
But in some conditions of the mind and body,
those lifestyle interventions can have a greater effect
in offsetting symptoms.
Whereas in bipolar disorder,
I think it's naive and in fact wrong
to say that lifestyle interventions alone
are going to prevent especially the extreme forms
of mania and depression.
Again, bipolar disorder being so serious
and carrying such high suicide risk,
we just have to point this out again and again.
Now, with that said, there are two substances
generally found as supplements,
although there are other sources of them as well,
including within nutritional sources that have been shown,
at least in some studies, to be pretty effective
in adjusting the symptoms of bipolar disorder.
And those two things are inositol and omega-3 fatty acids.
Now, inositol is a compound
that is taken for a variety of reasons.
It's something we've talked about on the podcast before.
I personally take inositol
not because I have bipolar disorder.
In fact, I am quite lucky that I don't have bipolar disorder,
but I take inositol at 900 milligrams of myo-inositol
every third night or so in order to improve my sleep.
It's something that I've added to my sleep stack.
It's something that I found greatly enhances
the depth and quality of my sleep.
And if I wake up in the middle of the night
to use the bathroom, et cetera,
it's greatly enhanced my ability to fall back asleep
when I want to go back to sleep.
It also seems to have a fairly potent anti-anxiety effect
during the day.
And as I discussed in our episode
about obsessive compulsive disorder,
inositol has been used at high dosages.
Again, I should say myo-inositol
has been used at high dosages,
levels of even 10, 18 grams.
Those are massive dosages, by the way,
to deal with certain symptoms of OCD to limited success.
And I should mention that high dosages
of 10 or 18 grams of inositol
can cause a lot of gastric discomfort, et cetera.
If you want to learn more about inositol
and its various uses,
I encourage you to go to examine.com
where there's the so-called human effect matrix
and that human effects matrix will describe the many places
in which myo-inositol and other forms of inositol
have been shown to be effective in, for instance,
reducing anxiety, enhancing sleep, and on and on.
Myo-inositol is important because myo-inositol,
and we can just say inositol,
is related to so-called second messenger pathways.
I don't want to get too deep
into second messenger pathways,
but when certain substances bind like neurotransmitters
to a receptor on a cell surface,
oftentimes those receptors themselves will open
and allow the passage of ions and other things into a cell.
Oftentimes they will engage
what are called second messenger systems.
That is, they will trigger mechanisms within the cell
to then go do other things.
This is probably something we should get into
in real detail in a future episode
for those of you that really want to nerd out
on cell-cell signaling, which is a favorite topic of mine.
In any case, inositol is related
to a number of so-called second messenger systems,
this handoff or this kind of stimulating
of changes within a cell that can inspire changes
in what's called a membrane fluidity,
can actually make the membranes of cells,
the outside fence around a cell,
which is made up of fatty stuff,
it can change the fluidity,
meaning how readily things can float around in the membrane.
We think of cells as very rigid,
like there's a cell, there's a neuron,
or there's a immune cell,
but actually those cells have a fatty outside,
in particular neurons have a fatty outside,
it's a thin fatty outside,
and it's called the cell membrane.
And things are floating around in that cell membrane,
but it's kind of like jello that hasn't quite fixed.
And so things like receptors moving into the synapse
or moving out of the synapse for homeostatic plasticity,
things like the ability for certain genes
to be turned on in a cell or not turned on
can depend a lot on things that are happening
in that cell membrane
and how readily things move around in the cell membrane.
One way to think about this whole picture
of membrane fluidity is that just imagine
that every one of your cells has this layer,
it's kind of a gelatinous-like layer,
and there are lots of little rafts floating around in there,
but those rafts are able to move more quickly
from one place to another,
or get more stuck in one place or another,
depending on how set that jello is.
Inositol and lithium, and as we'll talk about next,
omega-3 fatty acids seem to change
the fluidity of those membranes.
In other words, they allow things to move
in and out of those membranes more readily or not.
And this is no surprise,
given that those membranes are made out of fatty stuff.
In particular, the membranes of neurons
are called a lipid bilayer.
It's two layers of fat, okay, bi means two, lipid fat,
and omega-3 fatty acids of the sort
that are found in certain fish,
and fatty fish in particular,
and that are found in fish oil and cod liver oil, et cetera.
Omega-3 fatty acids, when we ingest them,
are used for a lot of different things,
but they can be readily incorporated into pathways
or directly incorporated into cell membranes,
changing the way those cell membranes work,
and if those cell membranes are the cell membranes
of neurons, changing the way that neurons work.
So the ability for fish oil, and in particular,
the omega-3 fatty acids, which come in varieties
like EPA and DHA, we'll talk about that in a moment,
have been explored at relatively high dosages
for their ability to offset some of the effects of mania
and to offset the effects of depressive episodes
in bipolar disorder.
And actually, the data there are pretty impressive,
although they are varied,
meaning you will find several studies,
and I'll mention a few, that found no effect
of omega-3 supplementation through fish oil.
Usually it's capsuled fish oil,
although fish oil can also be taken in liquid form.
Oftentimes, taking in liquid form
is the more cost-efficient way to do it.
Taking in capsule form is the more palatable way to do it,
because fish oil, for a lot of people, doesn't taste good.
But nonetheless, there are several studies that have shown
that supplementing with fish oil or omega-3 fatty acids
at levels of, for instance, four grams per day
for a period of time,
this is a study that we will link in the show notes.
This is Murphy et al. 2012.
This is a fatty acid supplementation of 70% EPA to DHA,
actually worsened symptoms of mania
over a period of about 16 weeks,
which on the face of it makes it seem like, okay,
omega-3 fatty acid supplementation,
very likely to not be good for bipolar disorder.
And yet, that was the manic phase.
When one looks at some of the other studies
of omega-3 fatty acid supplementation,
there is, for instance, a study published in 1999.
This is a much higher dosage supplementation
with omega-3 fatty acid.
This is a 9.6 grams of fish oil per day for four months.
And that actually greatly reduced symptoms
of bipolar depression compared to the control group,
which received olive oil.
Olive oil is a different form of fat,
monounsaturated fat,
but doesn't contain as much of the omega-3 fatty acids
and so forth.
So 9.6 grams of fish oil per day over four months
is a lot of fish oil to be ingesting on a given day.
This was a double-blind study.
This was only carried out, I should mention, in 30 subjects,
but it was males and females.
And the age range was pretty broad,
anywhere from 18 all the way up to 64 years of age,
which is important given the sort of longitudinal
or changes over time that one sees in bipolar disorder.
Here's the major takeaway.
Supplementing with high-dose omega-3s
does seem to be beneficial for a good number of people
with bipolar disorder.
However, again, I want to highlight,
however, it should not be viewed
as the only treatment approach for bipolar disorder.
This goes back to what I was saying before
about the essential need in most every case
for high potency prescription drug treatments
prescribed by a board-certified psychiatrist
for bipolar disorder.
However, omega-3 supplementation does seem to improve
or reduce the depressive symptoms
in the major depressive episodes of bipolar.
And there are a couple of studies,
and we'll link to these in the show notes as well,
that show that it may even improve
some of the manic episodes as well,
meaning it reduces some of the manic symptoms.
Now, I say all this from a place of great caution
because I know, especially for listeners of this podcast,
there's a lot of interest in the behavioral tools,
the supplement-based tools, the nutrition tools
that can support bipolar disorder.
But I don't think I can overemphasize enough
that especially for bipolar disorder
and the great risk of suicide and suffering
and inappropriate spending,
or I should say maladaptive spending and impulsivity
that's associated with bipolar disorder,
that it's hard to imagine a scenario
in which just talk therapy and fish oil
and lifestyle interventions are going to completely suppress
or treat bipolar disorder.
People with bipolar disorder really need to consider
the full picture of treatments, the drug treatments,
the talk therapy treatments and lifestyle treatments
and nutraceutical, or we can say supplement-based treatments
such as omega-3 supplementation,
as a full and necessary picture
for dealing with their illness.
I'd be remiss, however, if I didn't emphasize
that the omega-3 fatty acid supplementation
is very interesting,
not just in terms of the subjective effects,
people saying they feel less depressed
or able to sleep better,
or maybe even some reduction in manic symptoms.
There's actually been some really good brain imaging
to try and understand how omega-3 fatty acid treatments
are actually changing the brains and neural circuits
of people with bipolar.
And I will put a reference to this.
This is a paper that was published
in the American Journal of Psychiatry.
It's entitled Omega-3 Fatty Acid Treatment
and T2 Whole-Brain Relaxation Times in Bipolar Disorder.
I don't have the opportunity to go into a lot of detail
right now about what T2 whole-brain relaxation times are,
but basically when people go into a MRI
or F, functional MRI scanner,
magnetic resonance imaging scanner,
what they're getting essentially
is pulses of magnetic fields.
And the way that brain structures and neural activity
can be evaluated has a lot to do
with the sort of spinning or not sort of,
it has to do with the spinning and the relaxation times
of different elements,
literally the protons and electrons within the neuron.
So it gets really detailed there.
And the relaxation time is essentially looking
at how quickly some of that spinning returns to rest.
And in particular, the fact that the relaxation times
are different for aqueous, that is liquid,
versus lipid, fatty, versus other components of brain tissue.
And basically what this study shows
is that the membranes of neurons within the brains
of these people with bipolar disorder
showed more fluidity, more ability of things
to move in and around the membranes,
which we know is an important component
of neuroplasticity in bipolar subjects
that were treated with omega-3 fatty acids
as compared to bipolar subjects
that did not receive omega-3 fatty acids.
And fortunately, this study also include
a healthy comparison group
where they could essentially find
that people with bipolar disorder
who supplemented with omega-3s
had changes at the cellular level
and the neural circuit level
that brought their brains and neural circuits
closer to that of the healthy comparison subjects.
So while I don't want to point
to omega-3 fatty acid supplementation
as the be all end all of treatment for bipolar disorder,
certainly it is not,
it does have a strong mechanistic basis
for its possible support of neural circuitry,
of neuroplasticity, and in particular,
the ability to make changes in cell membranes
that are very reminiscent
of some of the neural circuit changes
and changes in membrane fluidity
that are seen with lithium treatment
and other known prescription drug treatments
that have been established now for decades
to be very effective for bipolar disorder.
So what that says is that omega-3 supplementation,
while not the only intervention that one should consider,
is something to consider and talk about with your doctor.
And it's operating in powerful ways.
It's not just that it's changing, for instance,
your gut microbiome, which is powerful,
but is indirect to the brain.
It does seem to be having direct effects
on neurons and neural circuits.
Before we begin to conclude our discussion
about bipolar disorder,
I want to talk a little bit about this word disorder.
And this is a theme that doesn't just relate
to bipolar disorder,
but other psychiatric disorders as well.
And when we think of a disorder,
we think of something that is really detrimental to us,
something that really impairs our ability
to function in work and school and relationships
and really starts to pull down our health status
in a variety of ways.
And certainly bipolar disorder meets those criteria.
However, there is this idea
that things like bipolar disorder,
even things like schizophrenia in some cases,
are responsible for some of the creative aspects
or the creative works that have been observed
and carried out by human beings for many centuries.
And believe it or not,
there are good data to support the fact
that certain aspects of mania
are associated with creativity.
Now, we are long overdue for an episode about creativity,
its neural circuit basis, its chemical basis,
here on the Huberman Lab Podcast.
And certainly we will have that conversation.
But in the meantime,
I'd like to just briefly touch upon this idea
that certain occupations are associated
with a higher incidence of bipolar depression.
And in fact, it's been explored at a research level.
Really, there are data pointed to the fact
that certain individuals of certain occupations
tend to be more creative
and that creativity is associated with,
again, associated, this isn't causal,
it's associated or correlated with higher levels
or incidents of bipolar depression
and maybe even other forms of depression.
So this is a study looking at mood disorders
in eminent individuals.
So these are people that are not just good at what they do,
but are exceptional at what they do
and explored the percentage of people in given professions
with either depression or mania.
And this was actually a data set gleaned
from more than 1,000 20th century Westerners
based on their biographies
that were reviewed by other people.
So it's a bit of an indirect measurement.
This isn't psychiatrist data.
This is data, or I should say these are data
that were compiled from self-reports
or from reads of self-reports.
And they explored a number of different professions.
So for instance, they looked at people in the military
or people who were professional athletes
or natural scientists or social scientists,
people who occupied positions in public office
or were musical performers, artists, nonfiction writers,
poetry, et cetera.
There are a lot of professions here.
I will post this, or I'll post a link to it
in the show note captions for you to peruse,
but I'll just give you a sense of the extremes
on this graph because they're very interesting.
It turns out that if you were to look at the profession,
or I should say among the professions
that they looked at in this study,
cause they didn't look at all professions,
those in the military and those who are professional athletes
or had jobs in the social or natural sciences had the,
of those, there was a lower percentage of those
that had depression or mania.
In some cases like those who were professional athletes
didn't seem to have, there was no incidents of mania,
at least in this data set.
Whereas at the opposite extreme of the graph,
those that were poets, so these are eminent individuals,
people that were exceptional poets,
exceptional fiction writers, exceptional artists
or nonfiction writers.
Well, they're especially for the poets.
You find that as many as 90% of these very successful poets
had either depression or mania, as high as 90%.
That's incredible.
Contrast that with military, where it's as few as 10%
or professional athletes, where it's as few as 20%
and for the professional athletes, as I mentioned before,
none of them had mania.
So does this mean that being a poet
will make you manic or depressed?
Well, first of all, let's look at the poetry category.
It turns out that 75% of these eminent poets,
these highly accomplished poets had major depression.
Whereas only about 20% of those poets had manic episodes.
So again, it's not that being a poet
is going to give you mania, certainly we're not saying that,
it's not that being a poet is going to give you depression,
but it turns out that people with depression
and people with depression and mania
seem to gravitate towards poetry
or at least are very successful at poetry.
Again, associative, correlative,
no causal relationship here,
but it is really striking to see how
the creative occupations, poetry, fiction, art,
nonfiction writing,
even though nonfiction writing is about nonfiction,
it's still creative, music, composition, theater,
much higher incidents of things like mania.
And in fact, for the people in theater, the actors,
even though the overall occurrence of depression and mania
is lower than that in poets,
the fraction of those individuals that have mania
is exceedingly high.
It's about 30% of those that they looked at
who are actors have manic episodes or have full-blown mania.
So I'm referring to these data because first of all,
I find them incredibly interesting, right?
Up until now, we've been talking about bipolar disorder
and other mood disorders for their maladaptive effects.
And again, they're extremely maladaptive,
much, much higher instance of suicide, et cetera.
But we'd be wrong to say that certain aspects
of manic episodes don't lend themselves well to creativity
or that certain aspects of major depression
don't lend themselves well to creativity
or to the performing arts or to poetry.
That said, in no way, shape, or form,
do I believe that being depressed is a good thing
or that being manic is a good thing.
Again, we return to the basic foundational criteria
for bipolar disorder and major depression,
which is that the pressured speech, the not sleeping,
the incredible increases in energy and the flights of ideas
are generally not going to lead,
or I think it's fair to say
are not going to lead to good places.
In fact, often lead to bad places.
But we would also be wrong if we didn't consider the fact
that there is a somewhat inextricable relationship
between mania and creativity.
And it could be that hypomania or brief periods of mania,
maybe even an hour a day or 30 minutes a day
of composing or writing poetry,
maybe even some of the lows that we feel,
some of the sadness, some of the grief,
some of the nostalgia that we feel,
provided that it's not pathologic,
that it's not persistent for the four or seven days
that are diagnostic of bipolar II
and bipolar I disorder respectively.
Well, then we can start to view emotional states
as something that can actually lend themselves
to positive outcomes and maybe even to creativity
and to improved occupations.
So it's important that we have a nuanced view
of what sadness versus depression
versus major depression are.
It's important that we distinguish between being erratic,
being very energized and full-blown bipolar disorder.
And I raise this for another reason as well.
Nowadays, it's very common to hear people saying,
oh, you know, that person is OCD.
Well, on the episode about OCD that I did a few weeks back,
that you can find if you like at hubermanlab.com,
in that episode, I pointed out that OCD,
obsessive compulsive disorder, is very maladaptive, right?
I think it's number seven, as I recall,
on the list of debilitating diseases,
all diseases in terms of lost time at work,
suffering relationships, et cetera.
So it's a really serious condition, and yet we often hear,
oh, that person is obsessive.
And as I pointed out,
there is obsessive compulsive personality disorder,
and then there is obsessive compulsive tendencies
which actually benefit people.
But that is distinct from obsessive compulsive disorder
as a clinically diagnosed thing.
Similarly, we hear that, oh, somebody's being bipolar,
you know, they're all over the place, they're bipolar.
Well, that's a very subjective and kind of label
that people give one another in passing.
More and more often I'm hearing this,
and yet bipolar disorder, whether or not it's BP1 or BP2,
are extremely maladaptive and extremely associated
with high suicide risk.
So while I'm not here to police people,
I'm certainly not the word police
or the nomenclature police,
I do think that whether or not you refer to people as OCD
or as bipolar, et cetera, that's up to you, all right?
It's not my place to say,
but I do think it's important
that all of us understand that these psychiatric conditions
carry with them tremendous maladaptive weight.
So today we've really done a deep dive
into bipolar disorder and to both the manic
and the depressive components that are present
or can be present in bipolar disorder
and the different forms of bipolar disorder
and some of the major treatments for bipolar disorder,
in particular lithium and its underlying mechanisms
and some of the neural circuit and chemical basis
and neuroplasticity basis of the treatments
for bipolar disorder,
in particular homeostatic scaling
or homeostatic plasticity.
All of that, of course, is relevant to bipolar disorder
and I hope will be useful in your understanding
and maybe even in your pursuit of treatments
for bipolar depression,
bipolar disorder for you or other people.
I also hope that it will be useful in your understanding
of how brain circuits work in normal conditions
or in conditions where there is no disease state
or maladaptive conditions.
Homeostatic plasticity is present in all of us.
Membrane fluidity due to how easily things move around
in the surface, the fatty layers on the outside of neurons
and the movement of receptors in and out of neurons,
that is present in all of us.
The influence of omega-3 fatty acids
is central to that discussion,
as is the discussion about various drug treatments
because even if you're not somebody
who's taking a drug treatment
or who is pursuing a drug treatment for bipolar disorder
or another psychiatric condition,
your serotonin levels, your dopamine levels,
your acetylcholine levels,
all of these play into what we call
your mental and physical health.
In fact, if any of you are interested
in the various categories of neuromodulators
and tools to adjust those neuromodulators
under more standard non-disease conditions,
we did an episode on neurochemicals and how to control them.
You can find that at hubermanlab.com
along with all other episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast.
I should mention everything is timestamped
so you can navigate to the specific topics
and tools of interest to you.
And meanwhile, I just want to thank all of you
for joining me on this voyage through the biology
and the treatments for bipolar disorder.
I do hope you found it beneficial
both for yourself and for others.
I just want to remind people that bipolar disorder
is an extremely serious condition.
If you suspect that you have bipolar disorder
or you know somebody who does,
please make sure that you or they
talk to a qualified health professional.
If you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific zero cost way to support us.
In addition, please subscribe to the podcast
on Spotify and Apple.
And on both Spotify and Apple,
you can leave us up to a five-star review.
If you have suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover
or guests you'd like us to interview
on the Huberman Lab Podcast,
or if you have questions about material already covered
please put that in the comment section on YouTube.
We do read all the comments.
In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of today's episode.
That's the best way to support this podcast.
During today's episode and certainly
on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast,
we talk about supplements.
Once again, while supplements
aren't necessary for everybody,
many people derive tremendous benefit from them
for things like enhancing sleep and focus
and hormone support and other aspects
of mental and physical health and performance.
As I mentioned at the beginning of today's episode,
the Huberman Lab Podcast is happy to announce
that we partnered with Momentous Supplements.
If you'd like to see our supplements
and the ones that we designed in concert with Momentous,
you can go to livemomentous.com slash Huberman.
Please also check out Huberman Lab on social media.
We are Huberman Lab on both Twitter and Instagram.
In both places, I cover science and science related tools,
some of which overlaps with the content
of the Huberman Lab Podcast,
but much of which is distinct from the information covered
on the Huberman Lab Podcast.
We also have a newsletter.
It's called the Neural Network Newsletter.
It's completely zero cost
and it contains summaries of podcasts
and some actionable protocols from each podcast.
You can sign up for it by going to HubermanLab.com,
go to the menu and click on Neural Network Newsletter.
You can also see some examples
of previous newsletters there.
I should mention that by signing up,
you do provide your email,
but we do not share your email with anybody.
And again, it is completely zero cost.
So once again, thank you for joining me today
for our discussion about the biology
and treatment of bipolar disorder.
And last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
And I'll see you in the next one.